EMERGE: Resolution-Agnostic Point Cloud
Generation with Equivariant Graph-Based Diffusion
Ilias Mitsouras Nikolaos Chaidos Giorgos Stamou Athanasios Voulodimos
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
{iliasmits,nchaidos}@ails.ece.ntua.gr
gstam@cs.ntua.gr
thanosv@mail.ntua.gr
Abstract
Point cloud generation has emerged as a crucial task for accurately capturing and
reproducing the complexity of the physical world. However, existing generative
approaches, predominantly relying on Transformers and Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs), frequently ignore the continuous, non-grid topologies inherent to 3D
spaces. Although the integration of graph-based structures has yielded significant
benefits in related discriminative vision tasks, such geometric architectures remain
noticeably absent from 3D generative modeling. To address this gap, we introduce
EMERGE (Equivariant Multi-scale GNN for Resolution-agnostic point cloud
GEneration), the first fully SE(3)-equivariant graph-based diffusion backbone
explicitly designed to generate point clouds while preserving continuous spatial
symmetries. Our framework bypasses the rigid resolution dependencies of standard
generative pipelines, enabling zero-shot inference at multiple, arbitrary spatial
resolutions. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate that EMERGE achieves
State-of-the-Art generation quality across standard metrics, while the strong in-
herent geometric inductive biases enable significantly faster training convergence
compared to existing baseline methods.
1
Introduction
At its core, 3D point cloud generation is the process of learning the underlying geometric distribution
of spatial data to sample and construct novel, high-fidelity 3D shapes. Recent advancements in
the field have been predominantly driven by Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [41, 32, 42,
28], which successfully adapt sequential probabilistic denoising to point distributions. However,
constrained by the computational overhead of the standard reverse diffusion process and the difficulty
of modeling intricate structures, the field has quickly evolved to include techniques ranging from
trajectory optimization and flow matching [39, 18] to hybrid representations [42] and latent space
diffusion [41].
Despite this rapid evolution, these continuous flow and diffusion-based models typically overlook
the non-grid structures and continuous spatial symmetries that naturally exist in 3D environments.
Formulating these symmetries as strict mathematical equivariances injects a powerful geometric
inductive bias, which has been proven to significantly enhance representation learning in complex
vision tasks [2, 12, 37]. Yet, even when current State-of-the-Art (SotA) models incorporate equivari-
ance for predictive tasks, they are frequently restricted to discrete rotation groups [8, 43], rendering
them unsuitable for high-quality generative applications. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) provide a
natural framework to overcome this by dynamically aggregating local geometric features in unordered
point clouds, driving SotA performance across discriminative 2D and 3D tasks [13, 24, 26]. Despite
their success in these areas, graph-based architectures have remained noticeably absent from 3D
Preprint.
arXiv:2609.26039v1  [cs.CV]  22 Sep 2026


generative modeling. Consequently, continuous 3D equivariance remains an underexplored approach
in this domain.
To bridge this gap, we propose EMERGE (Equivariant Multi-Scale GNN for Resolution-agnostic
point cloud GEneration), the first fully SE(3)-equivariant, graph-based diffusion model explicitly
designed for point cloud generation (Figure 1). By extending the principles of Equivariant GNNs
(EGNNs) into the 3D generative framework, our approach inherently respects continuous spatial
symmetries while dynamically modeling intricate topologies. Furthermore, unlike existing generative
architectures which remain fundamentally bottlenecked by the spatial resolution (i.e. number of
points) observed during training, our framework introduces a powerful capability to natively generate
point clouds at arbitrary inference resolutions. By introducing a parameter-free distribution align-
ment technique, we dynamically negate density-induced distribution shifts, allowing our model to
scale seamlessly at inference time, without any retraining, fine-tuning, or architectural modifications.
Empirically, we demonstrate that EMERGE achieves SotA generation quality with substantially
improved efficiency, requiring up to 10x fewer training epochs than existing methods. Our core
contributions are as follows:
• We introduce EMERGE, the first fully SE(3)-equivariant diffusion backbone for 3D point
cloud generation, natively integrating fundamental geometric inductive biases.
• We propose a novel Continuous Canonical Frame Voxel Pooling mechanism and a Global
Invariant Feature Attention module that efficiently capture multi-scale topologies while strictly
preserving spatial symmetries.
• We prove that density-induced distribution shifts can be tackled with a novel zero-shot distribu-
tion alignment technique, enabling high-fidelity 3D super-resolution at arbitrary inference
resolutions.
• We evaluate our model both quantitatively and qualitatively against prior methods, achieving
SotA performance while requiring significantly fewer training epochs.
2
Related Work
GNNs in 3D Vision
Graph Neural Networks have proven highly effective for modeling non-grid
topologies in computer vision. Particularly in the 3D domain, where point clouds are fundamentally
unordered and lack a regular grid, GNNs provide a natural framework to dynamically aggregate local
geometric features. Consequently, they have been widely adopted for 3D downstream tasks such as
segmentation [38, 25, 27], object detection [34], and classification [19, 27]. Despite their pervasive
success in these discriminative tasks, graph-based architectures have remained noticeably absent
from 3D generative modeling. In this work, we bridge this gap by introducing the first graph-based
diffusion backbone explicitly designed to tackle the inherently more complex challenges of point
cloud generation.
Point Cloud Generation
Early methods utilizing continuous normalizing flows [40, 20] and
VAEs [21, 1] successfully modeled point distributions but faced scaling and quality bottlenecks. The
field advanced significantly with Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [16], which ap-
plied sequential denoising directly to point clouds [28]. To mitigate high denoising latency and capture
complex geometries, subsequent works quickly evolved to introduce trajectory optimization [39, 18]
and hybrid point-voxel architectures like PVD [42]. Building on the need for scalable representations,
Latent Point Diffusion Models (LION) [41] map point clouds into a hierarchical latent space using
a VAE, performing the diffusion process entirely within this highly expressive space. More recently,
TIGER [32] introduced a time-varying denoising model that adaptively allocates its local and global
representational power depending on the stage of the generation process. While these methods have
achieved impressive generative capabilities, they largely ignore explicit non-grid topologies and
continuous spatial symmetries inherent in the 3D space. Our proposed method addresses this fun-
damental limitation by introducing a graph-based backbone that enforces strict SE(3)-equivariance,
while enabling zero-shot super-resolution generation at arbitrary resolutions during inference.
2D/3D Equivariant Models
Embedding equivariance or invariance directly into a backbone model
endows it with strong inductive biases regarding specific input transformations. This property has
been proven to significantly enhance representation learning, outperforming standard architectures
2


and heavy data augmentation in complex vision tasks [2, 12]. Beyond standard computer vision,
3D-informed architectures like Equivariant GNNs [33] have been fundamental in modeling physical
dynamics [11, 9], as well as in both predictive and generative tasks for chemical compounds [33,
3, 17, 36]. Although certain models have incorporated limited equivariance (typically restricted
to a discrete group of rotations) for downstream point cloud analysis [8, 43, 26], 3D equivariance
has remained entirely absent from current generative models; the need for a universal, continuous
geometric inductive bias in point cloud synthesis directly motivates our proposed architecture.
3
Preliminaries
Diffusion Models
Diffusion models are a class of generative probabilistic models that operate
by iteratively corrupting the original data with noise during the forward diffusion process and
subsequently learning to reverse this process to synthesize novel samples [35, 16]. Given a point
cloud X0 ∈RN×3 sampled from an unknown underlying data distribution q(X0), where N is the
total number of points, the forward process is modeled as a predefined Markov chain that progressively
adds Gaussian noise over t = 1, ..., T discrete timesteps, so that XT ∼N(0, I). Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models are trained to approximate the intractable true posterior distribution q(Xt−1|Xt).
Following [16], their simplified training objective is formulated as:
Lsimple = Et∼U[1,T ],X0∼q(X0),ϵ∼N (0,I)

∥ϵ −ϵθ(√¯αtX0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵ, t)∥2
2

,
(1)
where ¯αt = Qt
s=1(1 −βs), βt is the variance schedule and ϵθ is a neural network trained to predict
the added noise ϵ.
SE(3)-Equivariance and Invariance
Formally, the Special Euclidean group SE(3) describes
transformations consisting of a rotation matrix R ∈SO(3) and a translation vector t ∈R3×1. A
function fθ : RN×3 →RN×3 processing a point cloud X0 is considered strictly SE(3)-equivariant
if applying the transformation to the input results in an identically transformed output:
fθ(X0R + 1NtT ) = fθ(X0)R + 1NtT ,
(2)
where 1N ∈RN×1 is a vector of ones. In contrast, a function hϕ : RN×3 →RN×3 is considered
strictly SE(3)-invariant if its output remains unaffected by spatial transformations of the input,
hϕ(X0R + 1NtT ) = hϕ(X0). For brevity, all subsequent references to equivariance or invariance in
this work denote SE(3)-equivariance or invariance, respectively, unless otherwise specified, and we
omit the explicit 1N vector when applying translations by assuming standard dimension broadcasting.
4
Methodology
4.1
EMERGE Architecture
Given a noisy point cloud Xt ∈RN×3 at timestep t of the forward diffusion process, our framework
processes the geometry through a sequence of NB identical blocks, as shown in Figure 1. To balance
local geometric modeling with global structural coherence, each block alternates between two distinct
processing phases:
1. Local Processing: A hierarchical refinement phase that aggregates local features at varying
spatial resolutions using a Multi-Scale EGNN and a novel Canonical Frame Voxel Pooling
mechanism.
2. Global Processing: A macro-level phase that injects global shape context into the node features
via an efficient Global Invariant Feature Attention module.
Repeating this sequential processing progressively refines the geometric representation, ultimately
yielding the denoised spatial coordinates fθ(Xt, t) while strictly preserving the SE(3) symmetries of
the 3D domain. The following subsections detail the local and global mechanisms within each block.
4.2
Local Processing: Multi-Scale EGNN
To effectively model the complex geometry of 3D point clouds within a diffusion framework, our
architecture must inherently respect the continuous spatial symmetries of the 3D domain. While
3


...
FiLM
Multi-Scale EGNN
FiLM
Multi-Layer
EGNN
SE(3)-Equivariant
Voxel Pooling
Original Point
Cloud
Projection onto
the canonical
frame
Projection
back to the
world frame
Translated and Rotated
Point Cloud
Pooling
SE(3)-Equivariant Voxel Pooling
SE(3)-Equivariant Graph Neural Network
Noised
Point Cloud
Denoised
Point Cloud
Counts Cond.
Multi-Layer
EGNN
Counts Cond.
Unpooling
Unpooling
Multi-Layer
EGNN
Counts Cond.
Unpooling
MHA
MHA
MHA
Global Attention
`
Figure 1: Overview of the EMERGE architecture. Given a noisy point cloud Xt at timestep t, our
framework processes the geometry through NB sequential blocks. Within each block, a Multi-Scale
EGNN aggregates local features at varying spatial resolutions using our novel SE(3)-Equivariant
Voxel Pooling (detailed right), processing each of the M + 1 scales through a Multi-Layer EGNN
consisting of NE sequential message-passing layers. The hierarchical local updates are passed to
the Global Invariant Feature Attention module, which efficiently captures macro-level shape context
via inducing points. The model outputs the prediction of the denoised point cloud fθ(Xt, t) while
strictly preserving continuous spatial symmetries.
prior works on 3D predictive tasks such as E2PN [43], have incorporated equivariance, they are often
restricted to discrete subgroups of rotations (e.g., 16 predefined viewing angles in [43], 60 in [8]),
which inherently limits their representational capacity and can introduce discretization artifacts,
disqualifying these approaches for use in generative tasks. To overcome this, our backbone extends
EGNNs [33] to achieve continuous, universal SE(3)-equivariance without requiring expensive data
augmentation or restricting the model to specific spatial orientations.
Feature Initialization
We begin by initializing a globally shared, learnable feature vector
hinit ∈
RD. To condition the network on the continuous diffusion timestep t, we generate a
standard sinusoidal embedding temb ∈RD:
t(2n)
emb = sin

t
10, 0002n/D

,
t(2n+1)
emb
= cos

t
10, 0002n/D

,
(3)
where n denotes the dimension index. To construct the initial per-node feature embedding h0
t,i ∈RD
for each point i ∈{1, ..., N}, this shared vector is copied across all points and conditioned on the
continuous diffusion timestep t through a Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) layer [31] (further
details are provided in Appendix C):
h0
t,i = FiLM(hinit, temb).
(4)
Multi-Layer EGNN
The standard EGNN [33] iteratively updates equivariant coordinates and
invariant features. To effectively scale this for the deep generative process, we recast the updates as
residual functions (∆xl, ∆hl) across multiple layers. Because point clouds lack a regular grid, we dy-
namically construct a local neighborhood graph at each layer l by computing the k-Nearest Neighbors
(k-NN) for every point, based on their current spatial coordinates xl
t,i, using a fixed parameter k across
the entire network. For notational clarity, we drop the timestep t from all intermediate activations and
coordinates. Furthermore, we inject the diffusion timestep directly into the edge messages via inter-
mediate FiLM layers. For a given layer l ∈{1, . . . , NE}, the updates are formulated as (Figure 2):
mij = ϕe
 hl
i, hl
j, ||xl
i −xl
j||2
,
˜mij = FiLM(mij, temb),
(5)
∆xl
i =
1
|N(i)|
X
j∈N(i)
(xl
i −xl
j)ϕx ( ˜mij, finv,i) ,
∆hl
i = ϕh

hl
i,
X
j∈N (i)
˜mij

.
(6)
4


The features and coordinates are then advanced via residual addition: xl+1
i
= xl
i + ∆xl
i and
hl+1
i
= hl
i + ∆hl
i. Here, we model the ϕe, ϕx, and ϕh functions as MLPs, and finv,i represents
our novel injection of local invariant geometric features.
Invariant Geometric Features
A key limitation of processing raw relative distances is the loss of
descriptive local geometric context. While pairwise distances are informative, they do not explicitly
capture higher-level geometric properties, such as the local curvature, linearity, or planarity of
the point cloud at a specific neighborhood. To enrich the spatial messaging ϕx, we compute a 13-
dimensional feature vector finv,i describing these spatial characteristics around the neighborhood of
point i at layer l, alongside absolute spatial moments. These features are derived from the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the neighborhood’s covariance matrix. Intuitively, these geometric properties are
inherently SE(3)-invariant; the curvature, linearity, and planarity of a local patch remain identical
regardless of how the overall point cloud is rotated or translated.
-NN Graph Construction
Multi-Layer EGNN
Invariant Geometric
Features
FiLM
Sum-Pool 
Mean-Pool 
Figure 2:
Multi-Layer EGNN
Block Architecture.
The foundational EGNN architecture is already proven to be
SE(3)-equivariant [33]. Injecting these rich geometric features
does not violate the network’s strict equivariance. Informally,
any SE(3) transformation applied to a local neighborhood
simply rotates its covariance matrix, leaving its intrinsic
eigenvalues perfectly unchanged. While the eigenvectors rotate
alongside the input points, projecting the relative distance
vectors onto these rotated eigenvectors naturally cancels out
the rotation, yielding purely invariant scalars. Because finv,i
consists exclusively of these invariant scalars, the coordinate
update ∆xl
i remains a linear combination of equivariant vectors
weighted by invariant scalars, completely preserving the
SE(3)-equivariance of the network. A formal mathematical
proof, along with a detailed breakdown of the 13 invariant
features, is provided in Appendix B.
SE(3)-Equivariant Voxel Pooling
To generate high-
fidelity 3D shapes, the network must perceive geometry at
multiple hierarchical levels [42, 41], capturing both fine surface
details and broad structural topologies. However, standard
voxel-pooling maps points into a fixed, axis-aligned 3D grid;
if the point cloud rotates, the points fall into different cells,
inherently breaking equivariance. To maintain strict spatial symmetries without restricting our
diffusion backbone to predefined discrete viewing angles, we introduce Canonical Frame Voxel
Pooling, a technique that enables universal, continuously SE(3)-equivariant point aggregation.
Given a point cloud X ∈RN×3, we first mean-center the coordinates using their centroid µ to
achieve translation invariance: Xc = X −µ. Next, we compute the covariance matrix C = XT
c Xc
and extract a unique, right-handed orthogonal canonical frame V∗∈SO(3) via its eigenvectors,
resolving inherent sign and chirality ambiguities (Appendix A). Intuitively, any rotation of the
input simply rotates V∗by the exact same amount (see Figure 1). Consequently, projecting the
points onto this frame (Y = XcV∗) perfectly cancels the transformation, yielding strictly invariant
coordinates aligned to the object’s principal axes. Within this invariant space, we safely apply
standard spatial voxel pooling with grid size m to obtain pooled nodes Ym = VoxelPool(Y, m)
alongside mean-pooled node features Hm. Finally, the pooled coordinates are unprojected back
into the original world space, ensuring they rotate in perfect sync with the input:
Xm = Ym(V∗)T + µ.
(7)
Counts-Conditioning
When mapping continuous points to discrete voxels, varying node densities
emerge (some voxels aggregate many points, while others capture only a few), which is a critical
characteristic of the point cloud’s underlying local structure. To ensure the network is aware of this
structural density at different scales, we compute the point count cn for each voxel-pooled node n
and use it to condition the node features Hm via a FiLM layer (Appendix C). Because the voxel
grid is constructed inside the canonical space Y, the spatial boundaries of the grid are rotation and
translation invariant. Therefore, the number of points falling into each voxel remains unchanged
under any SE(3) transformation, meaning cn is an invariant scalar.
5


Unpooling and Scale Aggregation
Let Vvox = {v0, v1, . . . , vM} ⊂RM+1
>0
denote the M distinct
voxel sizes alongside the unpooled base resolution (v0), yielding coordinate updates ∆Xm and
feature updates ∆Hm for each scale vm. During unpooling, we simply copy the voxel output to
each of its assigned constituent points, so that ∆Xm ∈RN×3 and ∆Hm ∈RN×D. Different
scales hold varying importance depending on the current stage of the model; fine details are critical
during early diffusion timesteps for noise removal, while global structures are dominant at later
timesteps for macro-shape formation. Inspired by similar scale-mixing approaches [10], we introduce
adaptable coefficients λt = FiLM(λinit, temb) ∈RM+1 to aggregate the per-scale predictions, with
a learnable base vector λinit conditioned dynamically on the diffusion timestep:
∆X =
M
X
m=0
λt,m∆Xm,
∆H =
M
X
m=0
λt,m∆Hm.
(8)
Since the coefficients λt,m are invariant scalars, then the linear combination with the equivariant co-
ordinate updates ∆Xm and the invariant features ∆Hm preserve their respective SE(3) symmetries.
4.3
Global Processing: Invariant Feature Attention
To efficiently capture global shape context and complement the local inductive biases of our graph-
based messaging, we incorporate a global attention mechanism. We build upon the highly scalable
Inducing Point Attention paradigm [23] and extend it for our denoising diffusion backbone. This
approach is advantageous for its linear computational complexity relative to N and because it
inherently preserves the SE(3)-invariant properties of the hidden node features.
Standard Multi-Head Attention (MHA) across all N points is computationally prohibitive for dense
point clouds. Instead, we introduce a small set of learnable inducing points I ∈RC×D, where
C ≪N. The global attention is computed in three sequential stages:
1. Compression: A cross-attention layer where the inducing points I act as queries to aggregate
information from all node features H (which act as keys and values).
2. Processing: A self-attention layer applied exclusively over the inducing points I to capture the
global structural context.
3. Broadcasting: A final cross-attention layer where the original node features H query the updated
inducing points to retrieve the globally-aware context.
Because the entire module consists exclusively of, either point-wise transformations (e.g., FFNs, non-
linearities, and layer normalizations), or permutation-equivariant aggregations (MHA layer without
positional encoding) applied directly to the invariant node features H, the resulting updated features
retain their spatial invariance without requiring additional modifications to the attention mechanism.
To make this module suitable for the reverse diffusion process, we modulate the feature representations
at each stage based on the current timestep t. We replace standard Layer Normalization with Adaptive
Layer Normalization (adaLN) [30], a technique widely used in diffusion models. The scale and shift
parameters for the adaLN layers are regressed directly from the timestep embedding temb.
5
Experiments
Datasets
To be consistent with previous work, we utilize ShapeNetv2 [7] as the primary dataset
for training and evaluating our model, specifically using the preprocessing pipeline introduced by
PointFlow [40]. In particular, we train our model on the three widely adopted categories: airplane,
chair, and car, containing 2,832, 4,612, and 2,458 shapes, respectively. For training, we apply
per-shape normalization while each shape is sampled to contain exactly N = 2, 048 points.
Implementation Details Our architecture utilizes NB = 6 main blocks, each interleaving a local
Multi-Scale EGNN with a Global Inducing Point Attention module. Within the Multi-Scale EGNN,
each of the 7 resolution branches (the base resolution plus M = 6 voxel scales) is independently pro-
cessed by a Multi-Layer EGNN consisting of NE = 2 sequential message-passing layers (k = 5). Full
hyperparameters, including the exact multi-resolution voxel pooling array, are detailed in Appendix H.
Training The model is trained using a continuous diffusion process over T = 1000 timesteps, with a
linear noise schedule ranging from βstart = 10−4 to βend = 0.02. Following standard practices, our
6


Table 1: Evaluation metrics (1-NNA ↓) utilizing both Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Dis-
tance (EMD). Lower values indicate better generation quality, with 50% representing the theoretical
optimum. We evaluate across the standard dataset splitting strategy (upper section) and the LION
dataset splitting strategy [41] (lower section). Baseline results are taken from [41].
Airplane
Chair
Car
Model
CD (↓)
EMD (↓)
CD (↓)
EMD (↓)
CD (↓)
EMD (↓)
r-GAN [1]
98.40
96.79
83.69
99.70
94.46
99.01
l-GAN (CD) [1]
87.30
93.95
68.58
83.84
66.49
88.78
l-GAN (EMD) [1]
89.49
76.91
71.90
64.65
71.16
66.19
PointFlow [40]
75.68
70.74
62.84
60.57
58.10
56.52
DPF-Net [22]
75.18
65.55
62.00
58.53
62.35
54.48
ShapeGF [6]
80.00
76.17
68.96
65.48
63.20
56.53
SoftFlow [20]
76.05
65.80
59.21
60.05
64.77
60.09
SetVAE [21]
76.54
67.65
58.84
60.57
59.95
59.94
DPM [28]
76.42
86.91
60.05
74.77
68.89
79.97
PVD [42]
73.82
64.81
56.26
53.32
54.55
53.83
TIGER [32]
71.85
55.82
54.61
52.71
54.31
52.24
EMERGE
55.93
53.33
54.31
52.42
53.55
50.71
LION [41]
67.41
61.23
53.70
52.34
53.41
51.14
TIGER [32]
67.21
56.26
54.32
51.71
54.12
50.24
EMERGE
56.17
54.69
53.55
51.44
52.41
50.71
model predicts the clean data X0 using the equivalent reparameterized form of the simplified diffusion
objective in Eq. (1). To mitigate training instabilities and alleviate slow convergence across timesteps,
we apply the Min-SNR weighting strategy [14] with γ = 5 (full formulation provided in Appendix I).
Evaluation Metrics Following previous works [40, 41, 32], to quantitatively assess the performance
of our proposed model, we employ 1-Nearest Neighbor Accuracy (1-NNA) [40] as our primary
evaluation metric, calculated using both Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD).
This metric computes the accuracy of a leave-one-out 1-NN classifier tasked with distinguishing
between generated and ground-truth shapes. An ideal accuracy of 50% indicates that the generated
distribution is entirely indistinguishable from the real one, reflecting optimal generation quality.
Since EMERGE is SE(3)-equivariant, we also isolate structural quality by automatically aligning
the principal axes of all shapes via PCA (more details in Appendix H).
Results All samples for quantitative and qualitative evaluation are generated using 100 Denoising
Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) [15] steps. Quantitative results, summarized in Table 1, demon-
strate that our model achieves SotA performance. Under the standard splitting strategy, we exceed all
baseline metrics, and under the LION splitting strategy, we lead in 5 out of 6 metrics. Notably, our
model approaches the ideal 50% 1-NNA mark with 50.71% EMD for cars, 53.33% EMD for airplanes,
and 52.42% EMD for chairs. Furthermore, injecting equivariance into the backbone historically
Figure 3: Samples generated by EMERGE alongside various baselines for the airplane, chair, and
car categories. Each point cloud consists of N = 2, 048 points.
7


Figure 4: Samples generated by EMERGE for all 55 categories of ShapeNet (N = 2, 048).
leads to dramatic data and training efficiency [37, 4, 5]. This is strongly evident in our framework:
while recent diffusion baselines require extensive training regimes (such as LION needing 32,000
total epochs, 24,000 for the latent DPM plus 8,000 for the VAE), our model converges much earlier,
requiring only 3,100 epochs for airplanes, 2,600 for chairs, and 7,000 for cars. Qualitatively, as
shown in Figure 3, EMERGE consistently produces high-fidelity shapes with clear local surfaces and
global structural integrity compared to other methods.
Finally, to demonstrate the generalizability of our framework, we trained EMERGE on all 55
different categories from ShapeNet. As visualized in Figure 4, our model successfully generates
highly diverse and structurally complex point clouds without relying on explicit class conditioning.
6
Zero-Shot Super-Resolution
Standard diffusion-based architectures face severe distribution shifts when evaluated at higher
point densities, necessitating full retraining for varying inference resolutions. Although hierar-
chical VAEs like SetVAE [21] have attempted resolution-aware modeling, their VAE backbones
fundamentally bottlenecked their generation quality and geometric expressivity. To the best of
our knowledge, EMERGE is the first high-quality diffusion-based framework to introduce an
unprecedented, zero-shot capability to natively super-resolve point clouds at arbitrary inference
densities (Ninf > Ntrain). We show that density-induced distribution shifts are attributed to exactly
two sub-components and introduce a parameter-free alignment technique to dynamically negate
them during inference (Figure 5). This exact alignment is only possible because our model is
fundamentally a distance-based GNN, unlike prior frameworks [41, 32].
The two primary bottlenecks that occur when performing inference at Ninf > Ntrain and their
respective alignment propositions are detailed below.
Voxel Count Distribution Shift & Alignment At higher resolutions, the expected points per
voxel increases proportionally with the density ratio ρ = Ninf/Ntrain, pushing the inputs of the
count-conditioning FiLM layers entirely out of the training distribution.
Proposition 1 (Point-Count Alignment) To preserve the expected input distribution of the count-
conditioning FiLM layers, the raw inference voxel counts cn(Ninf) must be linearly scaled by the in-
verse density ratio prior to normalization: ˆcn = cn(Ninf) · (Ntrain/Ninf). (Proof in Appendix E.1).
Training Setup (
 points)
Standard -NN
Receptive Field 
Standard -NN (
 points)
Receptive Field 
Dilated -NN (
 points)
Receptive Field 
Upsample and
Add Noise
...
Base Point Cloud
Naive High-resolution
Point Cloud
...
High-resolution
Point Cloud
Upsampled Noised
Point Cloud
Timesteps
Denoising with EMERGE
Denoising with EMERGE and Distribution Alignment
Figure 5: Zero-shot super-resolution with EMERGE. (Left) Naive denoising at high resolutions
introduces severe distribution shifts, causing structural failure (top). Our parameter-free distribution
alignment technique negates these shifts, enabling high-fidelity super-resolution without retraining
(bottom). (Right) We resolve density-induced receptive field shrinkage by introducing a Dilated
k-NN graph, perfectly preserving the receptive field rtrain at arbitrary inference resolutions.
8


Figure 6: Generated samples using EMERGE and distribution alignment for varying resolutions.
Receptive Field Shrinkage & Alignment Assuming points are approximately uniformly distributed
over a locally smooth 2D surface manifold, the spatial radius rk of the EGNN’s (k-NN) graph scales
as rk ∝
p
k/N. Consequently, querying k neighbors at Ninf artificially shrinks the network’s spatial
radius by a factor of √ρ, inducing a mismatch with the receptive field observed during training.
Proposition 2 (Dilated k-NN Receptive Field Matching) Let d = ⌊Ninf/Ntrain⌋be the spatial
dilation factor. A dilated k-NN graph querying kext = k · d neighbors and subsampling every d-th
neighbor perfectly preserves both the spatial receptive field radius rtrain and the message-passing
cardinality k. (Proof in Appendix E.2).
With these two bottlenecks resolved after applying the parameter-free modifications of Propositions 1
and 2, the rest of our architecture remains inherently immune to density shifts. Because the
EGNN coordinate updates rely strictly on localized k-cardinal aggregations and the global attention
mechanism scales natively via a fixed number of inducing points, the overall feature magnitudes
remain entirely invariant to the raw point count (detailed analysis in Appendix G).
6.1
Super-Resolution Inference Pipeline
While our distribution alignment provides robustness to density shifts, full denoising from T to 0 at tar-
get resolution Ninf incurs severe computational overhead. We circumvent this with an efficient zero-
shot inference pipeline inspired by iterative refinement [29]. Rather than generating high-resolution
shapes from scratch, we reduce compute time by refining an upsampled low-resolution base shape:
1. Base Initialization: The pipeline accepts an arbitrary base point cloud Xbase ∈RNtrain×3
(synthesized natively or provided as pre-generated).
2. Deterministic Upsampling: The base point cloud is upsampled via point duplications to the
target resolution Ninf, yielding an initial dense cloud Xdense ∈RNinf ×3.
3. Forward Noise Injection: To break the spatial symmetries of the overlapping points, we
partially corrupt Xdense by simulating the forward diffusion process up to an intermediate
timestep tres, naturally perturbing and separating the coordinates.
4. Zero-Shot Refinement: Finally, we denoise the corrupted point cloud from tres to t = 0
utilizing our distribution alignment technique. Specifically, at each denoising step, we apply
Propositions 1 and 2 to align the voxel-count distributions and to preserve the spatial receptive
field, respectively, yielding the final high-resolution point cloud Xhr ∈RNinf ×3.
The complete inference pipeline is presented in Algorithm 1 (Appendix F). Qualitative results demon-
strating its effectiveness are visualized in Figure 6, where, instead of full DDPM sampling, we denoise
from tres = 150 using 30 DDIM steps. Furthermore, Figure 5 shows that inference at higher res-
olutions without distribution alignment induces geometric distortion and structural collapse, whereas
our pipeline preserves the global topology and fine-grained details of the generated point cloud.
7
Conclusion
In this work, we presented EMERGE, a fully SE(3)-equivariant graph-based diffusion model that
addresses the critical limitations of prior frameworks for 3D point cloud generation. By incorporating
novel canonical voxel pooling and global invariant feature attention, our architecture successfully
9


models complex, hierarchical geometries while strictly preserving continuous spatial symmetries. Fur-
thermore, we theoretically prove that density-induced distribution shifts can be isolated and negated,
empowering our framework to achieve zero-shot, high-fidelity 3D generation at arbitrary inference
resolutions. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations confirm that EMERGE achieves State-of-the-Art
generation fidelity and converges in significantly fewer training epochs than existing methods.
10


References
[1] Panos Achlioptas, Olga Diamanti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Leonidas J. Guibas. Learning
representations and generative models for 3d point clouds. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas
Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 40–49. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v80/achlioptas18a.html.
[2] Michael A. Alcorn, Qi Li, Zhitao Gong, Chengfei Wang, Long Mai, Wei-Shinn Ku, and Anh
Nguyen. Strike (with) a Pose: Neural Networks Are Easily Fooled by Strange Poses of Familiar
Objects. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
[3] Claudio Battiloro, Ege Karaismailoglu, Mauricio Tec, George Dasoulas, Michelle Audirac,
and Francesca Dominici. E(n) equivariant topological neural networks. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[4] Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P. Mailoa, Mordechai
Kornbluth, Nicola Molinari, Tess E. Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E(3)-equivariant graph neural
networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature Communications, 13(1),
2022. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29939-5. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-022-29939-5.
[5] Johann Brehmer, Sönke Behrends, Pim De Haan, and Taco Cohen. Does equivariance matter
at scale?
Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2025.
ISSN 2835-8856.
URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=wilNute8Tn.
[6] Ruojin Cai, Guandao Yang, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Zekun Hao, Serge Belongie, Noah Snavely,
and Bharath Hariharan. Learning gradient fields for shape generation. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
[7] Angel X. Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo
Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, Li Yi, and Fisher Yu.
ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. Technical Report arXiv:1512.03012
[cs.GR], Stanford University — Princeton University — Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago, 2015.
[8] Haiwei Chen, Shichen Liu, Weikai Chen, Hao Li, and Randall Hill. Equivariant point network
for 3d point cloud analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 14514–14523, 2021.
[9] Weitao Du, He Zhang, Yuanqi Du, Qi Meng, Wei Chen, Nanning Zheng, Bin Shao, and Tie-
Yan Liu. SE(3) equivariant graph neural networks with complete local frames. In Kamalika
Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 5583–5608. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/du22e.html.
[10] Shahaf E Finder, Ron Shapira Weber, Moshe Eliasof, Oren Freifeld, and Eran Treister. Im-
proving the effective receptive field of message-passing neural networks. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[11] Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, Fabian Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Max Welling.
E(n) equivariant normalizing flows. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34,
pages 4181–4192. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_files/paper/2021/file/21b5680d80f75a616096f2e791affac6-Paper.pdf.
[12] Jan Gerken, Oscar Carlsson, Hampus Linander, Fredrik Ohlsson, Christoffer Petersson, and
Daniel Persson. Equivariance versus augmentation for spherical images. In Kamalika Chaudhuri,
Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceedings
of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 7404–7421. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v162/gerken22a.html.
11


[13] Kai Han, Yunhe Wang, Jianyuan Guo, Yehui Tang, and Enhua Wu. Vision gnn: an image
is worth graph of nodes. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc.
ISBN 9781713871088.
[14] Tiankai Hang, Shuyang Gu, Chen Li, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Han Hu, Xin Geng, and
Baining Guo. Efficient diffusion training via min-snr weighting strategy. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 7441–7451, October
2023.
[15] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
[16] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-
Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-
12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Abstract.html.
[17] Emiel Hoogeboom, Víctor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant
diffusion for molecule generation in 3D. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 8867–8887. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
hoogeboom22a.html.
[18] Ka-Hei Hui, Chao Liu, Xiaohui Zeng, Chi-Wing Fu, and Arash Vahdat. Not-so-optimal transport
flows for 3d point cloud generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2025.
[19] Jincen Jiang, Lizhi Zhao, Xuequan Lu, Wei Hu, Imran Razzak, and Meili Wang. Dhgcn: Dy-
namic hop graph convolution network for self-supervised point cloud learning. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pages 12883–12891, 2024.
[20] Hyeongju Kim, Hyeonseung Lee, Woo Hyun Kang, Joun Yeop Lee, and Nam Soo Kim.
Softflow: probabilistic framework for normalizing flow on manifolds. In Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook,
NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
[21] Jinwoo Kim, Jaehoon Yoo, Juho Lee, and Seunghoon Hong. Setvae: Learning hierarchical
composition for generative modeling of set-structured data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 15059–15068, June
2021.
[22] R. Klokov, E. Boyer, and J. Verbeek. Discrete point flow networks for efficient point cloud
generation. In Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2020.
[23] Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh.
Set transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3744–3753,
2019.
[24] Caoshuo Li, Tanzhe Li, Xiaobin Hu, Donghao Luo, and Taisong Jin. Dvhgnn: Multi-scale
dilated vision hgnn for efficient vision recognition. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR), pages 20158–20168, June 2025.
[25] Guohao Li, Matthias Müller, Ali Thabet, and Bernard Ghanem. Deepgcns: Can gcns go as deep
as cnns? In The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
12


[26] Chien Erh Lin, Jingwei Song, Ray Zhang, Minghan Zhu, and Maani Ghaffari. Se(3)-equivariant
point cloud-based place recognition. In Karen Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski, editors,
Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 1520–1530. PMLR, 14–18 Dec 2023. URL https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v205/lin23a.html.
[27] Zhi-Hao Lin, Sheng-Yu Huang, and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang. Convolution in the cloud: Learning
deformable kernels in 3d graph convolution networks for point cloud analysis. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
[28] Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 2837–2845, June 2021.
[29] Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano
Ermon. SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[30] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 4195–4205,
October 2023.
[31] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film:
visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. AAAI’18/IAAI’18/EAAI’18. AAAI Press,
2018. ISBN 978-1-57735-800-8.
[32] Zhiyuan Ren, Minchul Kim, Feng Liu, and Xiaoming Liu. Tiger: Time-varying denoising
model for 3d point cloud generation with diffusion process. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9462–9471, 2024.
[33] Víctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant graph neural
networks. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 9323–9332. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
satorras21a.html.
[34] Weijing Shi and Ragunathan (Raj) Rajkumar. Point-gnn: Graph neural network for 3d object
detection in a point cloud. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2020.
[35] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep
unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis R. Bach and David M.
Blei, editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pages 2256–
2265. JMLR.org, 2015. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.
html.
[36] Clement Vignac, Igor Krawczuk, Antoine Siraudin, Bohan Wang, Volkan Cevher, and Pascal
Frossard. Digress: Discrete denoising diffusion for graph generation. In The Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=UaAD-Nu86WX.
[37] Dian Wang, Jung Yeon Park, Neel Sortur, Lawson L.S. Wong, Robin Walters, and Robert
Platt. The surprising effectiveness of equivariant models in domains with latent symmetry. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=P4MUGRM4Acu.
[38] Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M.
Solomon. Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. ACM Trans. Graph., 38(5), October
2019. ISSN 0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/3326362. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3326362.
13


[39] Lemeng Wu, Dilin Wang, Chengyue Gong, Xingchao Liu, Yunyang Xiong, Rakesh Ranjan,
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra, and Qiang Liu. Fast point cloud generation with
straight flows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 9445–9454, June 2023.
[40] Guandao Yang, Xun Huang, Zekun Hao, Ming-Yu Liu, Serge Belongie, and Bharath Hariharan.
Pointflow: 3d point cloud generation with continuous normalizing flows. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2019.
[41] Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten
Kreis. Lion: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[42] Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-voxel
diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 5826–5835, October 2021.
[43] Minghan Zhu, Maani Ghaffari, William A Clark, and Huei Peng. E2pn: Efficient se (3)-
equivariant point network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 1223–1232, 2023.
A
SE(3) Equivariance of Voxel Pooling
Let 1N ∈RN×1 and 1M ∈RM×1 be column vectors of ones, and let X ∈RN×3 be a point
cloud consisting of N points. Let g ∈SE(3) be a transformation parametrized by a rotation matrix
R ∈SO(3) and a translation column vector t ∈R3×1, such that its action on X is defined by
X′ = XR + 1NtT .
Let f : RN×3 →RM×3 denote our proposed Canonical Frame Voxel Pooling Operation. We assert
that f is exactly equivariant to the Special Euclidean group SE(3), satisfying:
f(XR + 1Nt) = f(X)R + 1MtT .
(9)
Proof
Step 1. Centering
Let µ ∈R1×3 be the centroid of the original point cloud X, calculated as µ = 1
N 1T
NX. The centered
point cloud is defined as Xc = X −1Nµ.
After applying the transformation g to X, the new centroid µ′ is:
µ′ = 1
N 1T
N
 XR + 1NtT 
=
 1
N 1T
NX

R + 1
N
 1T
N1N

tT = µR + tT .
(10)
The centered coordinates X
′
c for the transformed point cloud X′, based on Eq.(10) become:
X
′
c = X′ −1Nµ′ = (XR + 1NtT ) −1N(µR + tT ) = (X −1Nµ)R = XcR.
(11)
From Eq.(11) we observe that the translation term t is perfectly canceled, rendering Xc striclty
invariant to translations and strictly equivariant to rotations.
Step 2. Covariance and Frame Extraction
The covariance matrix C is computed as C = XT
c Xc ∈R3×3. The eigendecomposition of C yields
an orthogonal matrix of eigenvectors V ∈R3×3. Because any eigenvector vj and its negation −vj
satisfy the eigenvalue equation equally, the basis vectors spanning the eigenspaces are mathematically
unique only up to a sign. Consequently, evaluating the eigenvectors yields an arbitrary raw frame
V ∈O(3).
For the transformed centered points X
′
c the corresponding covariance matrix C′, based on Eq.(11) is
equal to:
C′ =

X
′
c
T 
X
′
c

= (XcR)T (XcR) = RT XT
c XcR = RT CR.
(12)
14


From the above equation it follows that the principal axes of C′ are exactly the principal axis of C
rotated by RT . Let V′ ∈O(3) denote the frame extracted for the transformed system, which is equal
to RT V. Due to the inherent sign ambiguity of the eigenvectors, the relationship between the two
extracted frames is given by:
V′ = RT VD,
(13)
where D = diag(d1, d2, d3) with dj ∈{−1, 1} represents the arbitrary sign inversions along each
principal axis.
To eliminate D in Eq.(13) and striclty guarantee a unique, rotationally equivariant frame V∗∈SO(3),
we resolve the two inherent ambiguities of the eigenspace.
Remark on Degenerate Eigenvalues: We acknowledge that in cases of perfect rotational symmetry
(where eigenvalues are degenerate, e.g., λ1 ≈λ2 ≈λ3), the eigenvectors become ill-defined and
strict equivariance could theoretically be compromised. However, such instances are statistically
insignificant for finite point clouds. Empirically, these degenerate covariance matrices are uniquely
encountered when processing pure Gaussian noise at t ≈T, a state in which the arbitrary geometric
alignment does not negatively influence the downstream generation.
2A. Spatial Extent Disambiguation
We first project the points onto the raw frame to obtain tentative coordinates ˆY = XcV. Let
ymax,j = maxi

ˆYi,j

and ymin,j = mini

ˆYi,j

. We define the correction sign matrix,
S = diag (s1, s2, s3) , where sj = sgn (ymax,j + ymin,j) , with sgn(0) = 1.
(14)
This forces the axis to point toward the spatial maximum of the data. The oriented frame is then
˜V = VS.
For the transformed point cloud, the tentative coordinates are:
ˆ
Y′ = X′
cV′ = (XcR)
 RT VD

= Xc

RRT 
VD = XcVD = ˆYD.
(15)
Because ˆY′ = ˆYD, the projected coordinates of the transformed point cloud along the j-th axis are
given by ˆy′
i,j = dj ˆyi,j for all points i = 1, . . . , N. Since dj ∈{−1, 1}, this operation represents
either an identity mapping or a strict reflection along the axis.If dj = 1, the spatial extents remain
identical: y′
max,j = ymax,j and y′
min,j = ymin,j. Conversely, if dj = −1, the axis is inverted,
which geometrically causes the maximum and minimum values of the set to swap and negate:
y′
max,j = −ymin,j and y′
min,j = −ymax,j. In both scenarios, the sum of the spatial extremes factors
out dj exactly:
y′
max,j + y′
min,j = dj (ymax,j + ymin,j) .
(16)
Consequently, when computing the new correction heuristic s′
j = sgn(y′
max,j + y′
min,j), we obtain:
s′
j = sgn (dj (ymax,j + ymin,j)) .
(17)
Because dj is a non-zero scalar (±1), it trivially factors out of the signum function, yielding s′
j = djsj.
In matrix notation, this establishes the strict identity S′ = DS. Applying this identity to the
transformed oriented frame, we get:
˜V′ = V′S′ =
 RT VD

(DS) = RT VD2S.
(18)
Since dj ∈{−1, 1}, it is strictly true that D2 = I. Thus:
˜V′ = RT VIS = RT (VS) = RT ˜V.
(19)
From Eq. (19), we can clearly see that the arbitrary solver ambiguity D cancels out.
2B. Reflections
While ˜V is deterministic, it is only guaranteed that ˜V ∈O(3). If det( ˜V) = −1, the frame represents
a left-handed coordinate system. Projecting into this frame would induce a reflection, destroying the
geometric chirality of the input point cloud.
To strictly enforce V∗∈SO(3), we compute a chirality correction matrix F = diag(1, 1, det( ˜V)),
which inverts the least significant principal axis if the frame is reflected. The final canonical frame is
V∗= ˜VF. By definition, det(V∗) = det( ˜V) · det(F) = det( ˜V)2 = 1.
15


We now prove this correction is invariant to R. The determinant of the rotated oriented frame is:
det( ˜V′) = det(RT ˜V) = det(RT ) det( ˜V).
(20)
Because the applied rotation R ∈SO(3), its determinant is exactly 1. Thus, det( ˜V′) = det( ˜V),
meaning the exact same correction matrix is generated: F′ = F. The final transformed frame
resolves to:
(V∗)′ = ˜V′F′ = (RT ˜V)F = RT ( ˜VF) = RT V∗.
(21)
Step 3. Canonical Projection
The points are projected into the uniquely resolved canonical frame via Y = XcV∗. Substituting
the transformed components X′
c and (V∗)′ from Eqs. (11) and (21) we get:
Y′ = X′
c(V∗)′ = (XcR)(RT V∗) = Xc(RRT )V∗= XcV∗= Y.
(22)
This proves the canonical representation Y is strictly invariant to any SE(3) transformation.
Consequently, any deterministic voxel pooling function ϕ(Y) applied to this space yields an invariant
set of pooled nodes Ypool = ϕ(Y), such that Y′
pool = Ypool.
Step 4. Unprojection
To return the pooled nodes to world space, the canonical points are unprojected via P = Ypool(V∗)T +
1Mµ.
For the transformed pipeline, the final output coordinates P′ are:
P′ = Y′
pool((V∗)′)T + 1Mµ′.
(23)
Substituting the derived identities Y′
pool = Ypool, (V∗)′ = RT V∗, and µ′ = µR + tT :
P′ = Ypool(RT V∗)T + 1M(µR + tT )
P′ = Ypool(V∗)T R + 1MµR + 1MtT .
(24)
Factoring out the right-multiplied rotation matrix R:
P′ = (Ypool(V∗)T + 1Mµ)R + 1MtT = PR + 1MtT .
(25)
The output coordinates P′ of the voxel pooling operation applied to the transformed input XR + t
algebraically map to the exact transformation of the original output PR + t. Therefore, the function
f rigorously satisfies SE(3) equivariance.
■
B
Invariant Geometric Features and Proof of Equivariance
B.1
Definition of Invariant Features
To capture the local topology around a point xi, we consider its k-nearest neighbors N(i). Let rji =
xj −xi denote the relative distance vectors. The local covariance matrix Ci ∈R3×3 is defined as:
Ci =
1
|N(i)|
X
j∈N (i)
rT
jirji.
(26)
Through eigen-decomposition, we extract the eigenvalues λ1 ≥λ2 ≥λ3 ≥0 and their corresponding
eigenvectors V = [v1, v2, v3]. From these, we construct our 13-dimensional invariant feature vector
finv,i, which consists of two groups:
Eigenvalue-based features (7 dimensions):
These describe the intrinsic shape of the local neigh-
borhood.
1. Sum of eigenvalues: P3
k=1 λk = λ1 + λ2 + λ3
2. Omnivariance: (λ1λ2λ3)1/3
3. Eigenentropy: −P3
k=1 λk ln(λk + ϵ)
16


4. Linearity: (λ1 −λ2)/λ1
5. Planarity: (λ2 −λ3)/λ1
6. Sphericity: λ3/λ1
7. Change of curvature: λ3/ P3
k=1 λk
Absolute spatial moments (6 dimensions):
These capture the distribution of points projected onto
the principal axes. For each principal axis w ∈{1, 2, 3}, we compute the first and second-order
absolute moments:
8-10. First-order moments:
1
|N(i)|
P
j∈N (i) |rjivw|
11-13. Second-order moments:
1
|N (i)|
P
j∈N (i) (rjivw)2
B.2
Formal Proof of SE(3) Invariance
We assert that the feature vector finv,i is strictly invariant to any SE(3) transformation applied to the
input point cloud.
Proof
Let 1N ∈RN×1 be the column vector of ones, and X ∈RN×3 a point cloud consisting of N points.
Let g ∈SE(3) be a transformation parametrized by a rotation matrix R ∈SO(3) and a translation
column vector t ∈R3×1, such that its action on X is defined by X′ = XR + 1NtT .
1. Translation Invariance
The relative vectors for the transformed points become:
r′
ji = x′
j −x′
i = (xjR + tT ) −(xiR + tT ) = (xj −xi)R = rjiR.
(27)
The translation term t is perfectly canceled. Thus, all subsequent operations on r′
ji are inherently
translation-invariant.
2. Covariance Rotation
The covariance matrix of the transformed neighborhood is:
C′
i =
1
|N(i)|
X
j∈N(i)
(r′
ji)T (r′
ji) =
1
|N(i)|
X
j∈N (i)
(rjiR)T (rjiR)
= RT


1
|N(i)|
X
j∈N (i)
rT
jirji

R = RT CiR.
(28)
3. Invariance of Eigenvalues
Let CiV = VΛ be the eigen-decomposition of the original covariance matrix. For the transformed
matrix C′
i:
C′
i(RT V) = (RT CiR)(RT V) = RT Ci(RRT )V.
(29)
Because R ∈SO(3), RRT = I. Therefore:
C′
i(RT V) = RT (CiV) = RT (VΛ) = (RT V)Λ.
(30)
This demonstrates that the transformed covariance matrix C′
i has the exact same eigenvalues Λ′ = Λ,
while its eigenvectors rotate equivariantly as V′ = RT V. Because the first 7 dimensions of finv,i
are derived entirely from Λ, they are strictly SE(3)-invariant.
4. Invariance of Spatial Moments
To compute the spatial moments, we project the transformed relative vectors r′
ji onto the transformed
eigenvectors V′:
r′
jiV′ = (rjiR)(RT V) = rji(RRT )V = rjiV.
(31)
17


The rotation matrix perfectly cancels out (RRT = I), leaving the scalar projections exactly identical
to those computed in the original frame. Consequently, the absolute moments (dimensions 8-13) are
also strictly SE(3)-invariant.
Since all 13 elements of finv,i are invariant, the vector itself is SE(3)-invariant. Therefore, multiplying
the equivariant relative vectors by a function of finv,i in Equation (6) preserves the overall SE(3)-
equivariance of the coordinate update mechanism.
C
Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM)
Throughout our architecture, we frequently inject external conditioning information (such as the
diffusion timestep temb or the voxel point counts) into the intermediate node features. To achieve this
without disrupting the spatial equivariance of the coordinate updates, we utilize Feature-wise Linear
Modulation (FiLM) layers [31].
Given an input feature matrix H ∈RN×D and a conditioning vector c ∈RDcond (which can be a
global vector per shape or a specific value per node), the FiLM layer applies an affine transformation
to the features. First, the conditioning vector is projected into a higher-dimensional space via a linear
layer to generate scale (γ) and shift (β) parameters:
[γ, β] = cWT + b.
(32)
where W ∈R2D×Dcond is the learnable weight matrix, b ∈R2D is the bias, and the resulting
concatenated vector is split evenly along the feature dimension such that γ, β ∈RD.
The intermediate features are then modulated element-wise:
FiLM(H, c) = H ⊙(1 + γ) + β.
(33)
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard (element-wise) product. We formulate the scaling factor as (1 + γ)
rather than γ to act as a residual identity mapping when the network is initialized with small weights,
ensuring stable training dynamics early in the diffusion process.
D
Voxel Counts-Conditioning Normalization
As introduced in Section 4.2, mapping continuous points to discrete spatial voxels naturally yields
varying point densities per voxel. We utilize these point counts to condition the pooled features,
providing the network with explicit structural density context at multiple resolutions.
However, raw point counts cn for a pooled node n can exhibit significant variance, with dense core
regions aggregating orders of magnitude more points than sparse outliers. Directly feeding raw counts
into the network can cause numerical instability and dominate the feature representations. To address
this, we apply a two-step normalization process before the FiLM conditioning:
1. Logarithmic Transformation: We first compress the wide dynamic range of the counts using a
smooth logarithmic transform to heavily penalize extreme outliers:
c′
n = log(1 + cn).
(34)
2. Per-Shape Min-Max Normalization: Point clouds within a dataset can vary drastically in their
local density distributions. Normalizing the counts globally across a training batch would entangle
the distinct topologies of different shapes. Therefore, we independently min-max normalize the
log-counts strictly on a per-shape basis. For a specific point cloud within the batch, we compute
its minimum and maximum log-counts (c′
min,g and c′
max,g) and normalize every pooled node n
as follows:
˜cn =
c′
n −c′
min,g
c′max,g −c′
min,g + ϵ.
(35)
where ϵ = 10−8 is a small constant to prevent division by zero in geometrically uniform spaces.
This bounded, shape-normalized scalar ˜cn ∈[0, 1] is then passed as the 1-dimensional conditioning
vector (Dcond = 1) to the dedicated scale FiLM layer, which effectively modulates the D-dimensional
pooled node features based on their relative structural density.
18


E
Proofs for Zero-Shot Distribution Alignment
In this section, we provide the formal proofs for the distribution alignment technique introduced in
Section 6, which enable our model’s zero-shot super-resolution generation capabilities.
E.1
Proof of Scale-Count Expectation Alignment
Proposition 1. (Scale-Count Alignment)
To preserve the expected input distribution of the count-conditioning FiLM layers, the raw inference
voxel counts cn(Ninf) must be linearly scaled by the inverse density ratio prior to normalization:
ˆcn = cn(Ninf) · (Ntrain/Ninf).
Proof
Let the underlying 3D shape be modeled as a locally smooth 2D surface manifold M with total surface
area A. This assumption naturally aligns with standard dataset construction practices, where point
clouds are typically derived via uniform spatial sampling from the continuous surfaces of 3D meshes.
We assume N points are sampled uniformly over M, yielding a global point density ρ = N/A.
During the SE(3)-equivariant multi-scale voxel pooling operation, the space is partitioned into
canonical grids defined by the discrete voxel sizes in Vvox = {v0, v1, . . . , vM} ⊂RM+1
>0
. For any
chosen scale vm ∈Vvox, let Bv denote a specific voxel bin that intersects the manifold, enclosing a
local surface area AB. Assuming a uniform local distribution, the expected number of points falling
into this specific voxel Bv is given by the spatial integral of the density over AB:
E[cn(N)] =
Z
Bv∩M
ρ dA = ρAB = N
A AB.
(36)
Let Ntrain denote the number of points used during training, and Ninf denote the target resolution at
inference, where Ninf > Ntrain. The expected voxel counts for each state are:
E[cn(Ntrain)] = Ntrain
A
AB,
(37)
E[cn(Ninf)] = Ninf
A AB.
(38)
Substituting AB/A from Eq. (37) into Eq. (38) we get:
E[cn(Ninf)] = Ninf
Ntrain
E[cn(Ntrain)].
(39)
To align the distributions before the logarithmic normalization and FiLM conditioning layers, we
define the scaled inference count ˆc as:
ˆcn = cn(Ninf) · Ntrain
Ninf
.
(40)
Taking the expectation of ˆcn:
E[ˆcn] = E

cn(Ninf) · Ntrain
Ninf

= Ntrain
Ninf
E[cn(Ninf)]
E[ˆcn] = Ntrain
Ninf
 Ninf
Ntrain
E[cn(Ntrain)]

= E[cn(Ntrain)].
(41)
Thus, across all scales vm ∈Vvox, the linear scaling aligns the expected input distribution of the
FiLM layer exactly with the distribution observed during training, neutralizing the density shift.
■
E.2
Proof of Dilated k-NN Receptive Field Preservation
Proposition 2 (Dilated k-NN Receptive Field Matching)
Let d = ⌊Ninf/Ntrain⌋be the spatial dilation factor. A k-NN graph querying kext = k · d neighbors
19


and subsampling every d-th neighbor perfectly preserves both the spatial receptive field radius rtrain
and the message-passing cardinality k.
Proof
Let rk denote the physical distance to the k-th nearest neighbor for a point xi, i = 1, . . . , N on
the surface manifold M. Assuming the manifold is locally smooth, the local neighborhood forms
a geodesic disk of area ≈πr2
k. For the disk to enclose exactly k points under a uniform density
ρ = N/A, the expected area must satisfy:
ρ(πr2
k) ≈k =⇒
N
A

πr2
k ≈k.
(42)
Solving for the physical radius rk:
rk(N) ≈
r
kA
πN .
(43)
During training (N = Ntrain), the network optimizes its weights based on the structural context
enclosed within the radius rtrain:
rtrain ≈
r
kA
πNtrain
.
(44)
During inference (N = Ninf = d · Ntrain), maintaining a standard k-NN graph causes the radius to
shrink inversely proportional to the square root of the density ratio:
rinf,standard ≈
s
kA
π(d · Ntrain) = rtrain
√
d
.
(45)
To restore the receptive field, the Dilated k-NN algorithm expands the initial query to kext = k · d
neighbors. The physical radius encompassing these kext points is:
rinf,dilated ≈
s
kextA
πNinf
=
s
(k · d)A
π(Ntrain · d) =
r
kA
πNtrain
= rtrain.
(46)
Thus, the spatial boundary of the neighborhood is perfectly preserved.
To complete the graph construction, the algorithm sorts the k · d points by distance and subsamples
every d-th point. The number of selected neighbors |N(i)dilated| is exactly:
|N(i)dilated| = k · d
d
= k
(47)
Because the message-passing aggregations in the EGNN sum exactly k terms, the magnitude and
variance of the aggregated feature vectors remain perfectly in-distribution.
■
It is also important to highlight that we apply this Dilated k-NN only to the EGNN that transforms
the base point cloud, and we keep the standard k-NN for all the EGNNs that operate on voxel-pooled
versions. This is due to the fact that voxel sizes (and therefore also their locations and density) are
predefined as model hyperparameters, so they never change even when Ninf̸ = Ntrain, so there is
no need for Dilated k-NN on these layers.
F
Super-Resolution Inference Pipeline Pseudo-code
In this section, we provide the complete pseudo-code for the zero-shot super-resolution inference
pipeline introduced in Section 6. Algorithm 1 details the step-by-step procedure, including the
base initialization, deterministic upsampling, forward noise injection, and the application of our
parameter-free distribution alignment during the reverse denoising process.
G
Higher-Resolution Distribution-Shift of the Core Architecture
In Section 6, we demonstrated that aligning the voxel-count distribution and preserving the k-NN
receptive field eliminates the two primary bottlenecks for zero-shot super-resolution. Here, we also
show that the remaining operations in the EMERGE architecture are natively invariant to the total
point count N, ensuring no hidden distribution shifts occur when scaling to Ninf > Ntrain.
20


Algorithm 1 Zero-Shot Super-Resolution Inference Pipeline
Require: Base point cloud Xbase ∈RNtrain×3, Target resolution Ninf, Intermediate timestep tres,
Pretrained model fθ, Noise schedule ¯αt
Ensure: High-resolution point cloud Xhr ∈RNinf ×3
1: // Step 1: Base Initialization
2: Load or natively synthesize base point cloud Xbase
3: // Step 2: Deterministic Upsampling
4: d ←⌊Ninf/Ntrain⌋
▷Calculate spatial dilation factor
5: Xdense ←DuplicatePoints(Xbase, d)
▷Yields shape of size Ninf × 3
6: // Step 3: Forward Noise Injection
7: ϵ ∼N(0, I)
8: Xtres ←√¯αtresXdense + √1 −¯αtresϵ
▷Diffuse to intermediate timestep
9: // Step 4: Zero-Shot Refinement with Distribution Alignment
10: Xt ←Xtres
11: for t = tres, tres −1, . . . , 1 do
▷Can utilize DDPM or DDIM sampling
12:
Distribution Alignment Step:
13:
For all voxel scales vm, scale raw counts: ˆcn ←cn(Ninf) · (Ntrain/Ninf)
14:
Construct Dilated k-NN graph (dilation factor d) only on base point cloud scale
15:
Model Prediction:
16:
˜X0 ←fθ(Xt, t)
▷Denoise using aligned graph & scaled counts
17:
Sampling Update:
18:
Compute Xt−1 from Xt and ˜X0 using standard diffusion transitions
19: end for
20: Xhr ←X0
21: return Xhr
EGNN Message Passing Cardinality
The EGNN updates for coordinates and features rely on
aggregating messages over a local neighborhood N(i). As proven in Appendix E.2, our Dilated k-NN
algorithm strictly guarantees that the inference neighborhood size remains exactly |N(i)dilated| = k.
Consequently, both the coordinate update, which computes an average over neighbors:
∆xl
i = 1
k
X
j∈N (i)dilated
(xl
i −xl
j)ϕx ( ˜mij, finv,i) ,
(48)
and the feature update, which computes a sum over neighbors:
∆hl
i = ϕh

hl
i,
X
j∈N (i)dilated
˜mij

,
(49)
aggregate exactly k terms. Because the cardinality and spatial bounds of the neighborhood match
the training phase precisely, the variance and expected magnitude of these aggregations remain
completely unshifted.
Scale-Agnostic Voxel Pooling
During the Multi-Scale Point Cloud Processing phase, the node
features are obtained by mean-pooling the features of all points that fall within a given voxel. Let a
given voxel n enclose cn points. The pooled feature representation at voxel scale vm is 1
cn
Pcn
j=1 hj,m.
As the total points N increases to Ninf, the number of points within the voxel increases proportionally
by ρ = Ninf/Ntrain. However, because mean-pooling fundamentally computes the expected feature
value within that local spatial volume, evaluating it with a denser point cloud simply acts as a higher-
resolution Monte Carlo estimate of the continuous spatial expectation. The expected magnitude of
the pooled feature is mathematically independent of cn.
21


Global Inducing Point Attention
The Global Invariant Feature Attention module utilizes a fixed
set of C inducing points, where C ≪Ntrain. During the compression stage, these inducing points
act as queries to aggregate information from the N node features via Cross-Attention:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
QKT
√
D

V.
(50)
The softmax function normalizes the attention weights across the variable sequence length N,
ensuring the weights inherently sum to 1 regardless of the number of keys. As N increases, the
individual attention weights become proportionally smaller, but their sum remains constant. Therefore,
the output of the attention mechanism is always a convex combination of the value vectors V. Much
like the local mean-pooling operation above, increasing N simply provides a denser, finer-grained
sampling of the underlying continuous shape manifold, leaving the expected magnitude and variance
of the global context vectors perfectly aligned with the training distribution. We also don’t utilize any
positional embeddings for the point features H (which would obviously incur distribution shifts at
different resolution).
H
Extended Experimental Setup and Implementation Details
In this section, we provide the complete architectural and hyperparameter details necessary to
reproduce our experiments, expanding upon the summary provided in Section 5.
Architecture
Our architecture utilizes NB = 6 main blocks, each interleaving a local Multi-Scale
EGNN with a Global Inducing Point Attention module. Within the Multi-Scale EGNN, each of the
7 resolution branches (the base resolution plus M = 6 voxel scales) is independently processed
by a Multi-Layer EGNN consisting of NE = 2 sequential message-passing layers (k = 5). The
Inducing Point Attention module comprises 128 learnable inducing points and 8 attention heads.
Further details are presented in Table 2.
A fundamental characteristic of our SE(3)-equivariant architecture is that it generates point clouds in
arbitrary spatial orientations, rather than defaulting to the canonical poses of the training set. Because
standard distance metrics such as CD and EMD are strictly pose-dependent, directly evaluating
unaligned point clouds would artificially inflate the error margins. To ensure a fair and mathematically
rigorous comparison against non-equivariant baselines, we apply Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) to both the generated and ground-truth shapes prior to evaluation. By aligning the principal
axes of the point clouds, we isolate the true geometric fidelity and structural quality of the generated
manifolds, independent of their spatial orientation.
All experiments were conducted on a 4xH100 GPU node, with a total VRAM of 256GB, 512GB
RAM, and 2x Intel Sapphire Rapids 8460Y+ (80 cores in total). In terms of computational efficiency,
a full 100-step DDIM generation takes ∼41 seconds, whereas our zero-shot super-resolution to
15,000 points given a base shape (with 30 inference steps) requires just ∼34 seconds.
Local and Global Multi-Scale Pooling
For the local geometric interactions within the EGNN
layers, we construct a k-nearest neighbor graph utilizing k = 5. To establish a robust hierarchi-
cal geometry representation, our equivariant voxel pooling procedure is applied across 6 distinct
spatial resolutions. Specifically, we utilize the following voxel pooling sizes: {u1, . . . , uM} =
{0.2, 0.4, 0.65, 1.0, 2.8, 4.0}, where M = 7.
I
Min-SNR Weighting Strategy Formulation
As established in our methodology, our model is designed to predict the clean data X0 rather than the
added noise ϵ. By reparameterizing the standard simplified diffusion objective in Eq. (1), the base
loss function for X0-prediction takes the equivalent form:
LX0 = Et∼U[1,T ],X0∼q(X0),ϵ∼N (0,I)

¯αt
1 −¯αt
||X0 −fθ(Xt, t)||2
2

.
(51)
However, directly optimizing this objective can lead to severe training instabilities and slow conver-
gence rates due to conflicting optimization directions across different diffusion timesteps. To mitigate
22


Table 2: Complete hyperparameters and architectural configurations for EMERGE.
Category
Hyperparameter
Value
Architecture
Hidden Dimension (D)
512
Multi-Scale EGNN Blocks (NB)
6
EGNN Layers per Block (NE)
2
Global Attention Heads
8
Inducing Points
128
# Params
285M
Graph & Pooling
k-Nearest Neighbors (k)
5
Training Resolution (Ntrain)
2,048
Voxel Sizes {v1, . . . vM}
{0.2, 0.4, 0.65, 1.0, 2.8, 4.0}
Diffusion
Timesteps (T)
1000
Noise Schedule (β)
Linear (10−4 to 0.02)
Min-SNR Clipping (γ)
5
Training
Optimizer
AdamW
Batch Size
160
Learning Rate
1e −4
Learning Rate Scheduler
Cosine
Warmup Steps
300
Epochs (Airplane)
3, 100
Epochs (Chair)
2, 600
Epochs (Car)
7, 000
Epochs (55-Class)
2, 100
this, we utilize the Min-SNR-γ weighting strategy [14]. By applying this truncation strategy, the final
training objective optimized by our network becomes:
LX0,Min-SNR = Et∼U[1,T ],X0∼q(X0),ϵ∼N (0,I)

min(SNR(t), γ)||X0 −fθ(Xt, t)||2
2

,
(52)
where SNR(t) =
¯αt
1−¯αt and we set γ = 5 [14].
J
Extended Qualitative Results
In this section, we provide additional qualitative results to further demonstrate the generative capacity,
diversity, and scalability of EMERGE.
J.1
Standard Benchmark Categories
In Figure 7, we present extended generation samples for the three core ShapeNet benchmark categories
(Airplane, Car, and Chair). These results highlight the ability of our SE(3)-equivariant backbone to
consistently produce high-fidelity geometries with smooth surfaces and sharp structural details.
J.2
55-Class Generation
Figure 8 illustrates extended generation samples for all 55 classes of ShapeNet. Upon scrutinizing
this figure, we deduce that EMERGE successfully synthesizes a wide variety of objects, ranging
from dense, volumetric shapes (e.g., sofas, vessels) to intricate, thin structures (e.g. lamps, firearms,
guitars, earphones etc.).
23


Figure 7: Generated samples using EMERGE for the Shapenet classes: Airplane, Car, and Chair.
Figure 8: Samples generated by EMERGE for all 55 categories of ShapeNet.
J.3
Zero-Shot Super-Resolution
Finally, to further validate our proposed parameter-free distribution alignment technique, Figures
9 and 10 provide additional examples of EMERGE performing zero-shot super-resolution for the
three categories Airplane, Car, and Chair, and for all 55 categories of ShapeNet, respectively. In
Figure 9, we also showcase several super-resolution attempts using EMERGE without our proposed
distribution alignment technique, which results in complete structural collapse of the point cloud,
further proving that analytically resolving these receptive field shifts is essential for scaling inference
beyond the training resolution.
To further demonstrate the scalability of our distribution alignment technique, Figure 11 showcases
zero-shot super-resolution scaled up to Ninf = 40, 000 points. This proves that EMERGE maintains
strict geometric stability even at exceptionally high density ratios.
K
Limitations
While EMERGE demonstrates strong sample efficiency and high-fidelity generation, its current imple-
mentation incurs certain computational bottlenecks. Unlike widely adopted architectures that benefit
from years of highly specialized, hardware-level GPU optimization, our framework relies on complex
geometric operations that lack equivalent native support. Specifically, the dynamic construction of
the k-Nearest Neighbor graph at each layer and the analytical eigenvector computations required for
both our canonical frame extraction and invariant feature representations introduce noticeable latency.
24


Figure 9: Generated samples using EMERGE, with and without distribution alignment for varying
resolutions, for the Shapenet classes: Airplane, Car, and Chair.
Consequently, although EMERGE requires vastly fewer total epochs to converge, the wall-clock time
per individual training step and inference pass is comparatively higher than that of standard diffusion
baselines.
Figure 10: Generated samples using EMERGE and distribution alignment for varying resolutions, for
all 55 classes of ShapeNet.
25


Figure 11: Extended zero-shot super-resolution results for resolutions up to 40,000 points (Ninf =
40, 000).
26
