Title: MultiAct: Text-to-Motion Generation from Composite Text via Tailored Attention Guidance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30925v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:45:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# MultiAct: Text-to-Motion Generation from Composite Text via Tailored Attention Guidance 

# NATHAN SALA, Tel Aviv University, Israel 

# OFIR ABRAMOVICH, Reichman University, Israel and CYENS Centre of Excellence, Cyprus 

# ARIEL SHAMIR, Reichman University, Israel 

# DANIEL COHEN-OR, Tel Aviv University, Israel 

# ANDREAS ARISTIDOU, University of Cyprus, Cyprus and CYENS Centre of Excellence, Cyprus 

# SIGAL RAAB, Tel Aviv University, Israel time  time 

## A person hops forward while raising arms 

Arms not raised  Arms raised! 

## A person dribbles a ball while moving backward 

Not dribbling  Dribbling! 

time  time 

“A person hops forward while raising his arms ”

Arms not raised  Arms raised! 

“A person dribbles a ball while moving backwards” 

Not dribbling  Dribbling! 

Fig. 1. MultiAct synthesizes motion from composite textual descriptions by selectively modulating cross-attention to amplify weakly represented elements in the prompt. Blue: Backbone text-to-motion synthesis fails to generate key action components, such as raising the arms while hopping forward (left) and dribbling a ball while moving backward (right). Brown: Our framework successfully generates all action primitives specified in the prompt. Color saturation indicates time progression; higher saturation indicates later times. 

Text-to-motion generation has progressed rapidly in recent years, offering an expressive interface for animation and human–computer interaction. However, current models remain brittle when handling prompts that de-scribe multiple actions occurring at the same time. Rather than realizing all components of a composite description, models frequently prioritize a single dominant action and neglect the rest, leading to incomplete or ambigu-ous motion. We present MultiAct, an unpaired, inference-time framework for compositional text-to-motion synthesis that operates directly on pre-trained motion generators without retraining or architectural modification. Our method counteracts semantic collapse by adaptively amplifying cross-attention scores associated with underrepresented prompt components. We note that effective modulation depends on prompt-specific choices, such as which tokens and layers to target, and introduce a lightweight auxiliary decision scheme that determines the most effective attention-strengthening parametrization. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demon-strate that MultiAct consistently outperforms existing baselines on com-posite prompts, achieving improved semantic coverage while preserving motion realism. Project page: https://natsala13.github.io/multiact.github.io. 

1 Introduction 

Human motion synthesis aims to generate realistic, physically plau-sible motion while respecting high-level semantic intent. Early data-driven methods focused on kinematic realism or action-specific generation [Guo et al . 2020; Holden et al . 2016; Petrovich et al . 2021]. Subsequent models have substantially expanded this paradigm by 

> Authors’ Contact Information: Nathan Sala, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, natouda@gmail.com; Ofir Abramovich, Reichman University, Herzliya, Israel and CYENS Centre of Excellence, Nicosia, Cyprus, ofir1080@gmail.com; Ariel Shamir, Reichman University, Herzliya, Israel, arik@runi.ac.il; Daniel Cohen-Or, Tel Aviv Uni-versity, Tel Aviv, Israel, cohenor@gmail.com; Andreas Aristidou, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus and CYENS Centre of Excellence, Nicosia, Cyprus, a.aristidou@ieee.org; Sigal Raab, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, sigal.raab@gmail.com.

enabling motion synthesis from abstract controls such as natural lan-guage [Guo et al . 2024, 2022a; Tevet et al . 2023; Zhang et al . 2024a]. These text-to-motion models thus provide an intuitive interface for animation, virtual agents, and human–computer interaction. Despite this progress, most text-to-motion models excel only for 

single atomic actions and struggle with composite prompts. For com-plex descriptions, they often attend primarily to the dominant verb and ignore secondary constraints, a phenomenon we call vanishing semantics . As a result, the generated motion only partially satisfies the prompt, failing to realize all specified actions and details ( e.g. ,adverbs, direction, or manner). We attribute this to entangled cross-attention: when multiple semantic components compete, attention mass collapses onto a few dominant tokens, suppressing the rest. In this work, we study the generation of simultaneous actions from 

composite prompts , such as “running while waving arms,” where multiple actions must co-occur in time and may engage overlapping sets of body parts. This setting differs fundamentally from sequential actions (e.g. , “walk, then jump”), which can often be handled via concatenation or temporal planning [Athanasiou et al . 2022; Shafir et al . 2024; Zhang et al . 2023b]. We consider a motion generation as successful when all semantic components are visibly present and co-occur for at least part of the sequence, without prescribing when overlap must occur. Successful synthesis of simultaneous ac-tions requires preserving multiple constraints concurrently, without allowing any single action to dominate. Existing approaches to co-occurring actions rely on restrictive assumptions. For example, STMC [Petrovich et al . 2024] requires structured inputs (explicit action tracks) and prior body–text corre-spondences, limiting general inference-time control. Other methods     

> arXiv:2605.30925v1 [cs.CV] 29 May 2026 2•Sala et al. “a person
> dribbles a ball
> while
> moving backwards”
> Parameter
> Selection
> Guided
> Generation
> Fig. 2. Pipeline. Given a text prompt, MultiAct selects prompt-specific parameters (Sec. 4), applies tailored guided generation (Sec. 3.2), and outputs the resulting motion.

rely on auxiliary components, such as a graph reasoning network [Chang et al. 2025; Jin et al. 2023], which complicates the setup. Inspired by inference-time attention manipulation in text-to-image generation [Chefer et al . 2023; Rassin et al . 2023], we explore similar control for motion. However, directly transferring these tech-niques is unstable: motion’s spatio-temporal nature makes temporal coherence highly sensitive to attention perturbations, and effective settings are prompt-dependent ( e.g. , token/layer choices). We introduce MultiAct, an unpaired, inference-time, optimization-based framework for compositional text-to-motion generation. Mul-tiAct operates on a pretrained motion backbone without fine-tuning or architectural changes, and mitigates vanishing semantics by se-lectively amplifying cross-attention for underrepresented semantics (defined in Sec. 3.2). This method relies on several parameters: the token to strengthen, the transformer layer to which it is applied, and the diffusion-step schedule. Parameter choice is prompt-dependent; therefore, we propose a lightweight parameter-selection scheme, ParamGate, which predicts these parameters, eliminating the need for exhaustive search and enabling generalization across prompts. Together, these components enable reliable compositional control for simultaneous-action synthesis while preserving motion realism and temporal coherence, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Quantitative and qualitative results show that MultiAct consistently outperforms prior baselines, including ones specializing in composite-motion. 

2 Related Work 

Text-conditioned human motion generation. Text-to-motion gen-eration has been widely studied using both discrete and continuous motion representations. Discrete approaches typically quantize con-tinuous motion into codebook tokens and generate motion autore-gressively using transformers conditioned on text [Guo et al. 2025, 2024, 2022b; Javed et al . 2024; Jiang et al . 2024; Pinyoanuntapong et al . 2025, 2024a,b; Qian et al . 2025b; Zhang et al . 2023c, 2025a]. While this formulation simplifies training, it introduces quantiza-tion errors that degrade fine-grained motion details. Autoregressive generation, whether temporal or mask-based, is unidirectional and thus prone to error accumulation. Continuous text-to-motion generation is dominated by diffusion-based models, which synthesize motion by iteratively denoising input noise conditioned on text [Qian et al . 2025a; Tevet et al . 2023; Zhang et al . 2024b]. Diffusion can operate in pose space or in learned latent spaces: pose-space diffusion [Raab et al . 2024b; Tevet et al .2025] is sensitive to mocap noise, whereas latent diffusion mitigates this by compressing motion via VAEs [Chen et al . 2023; Dai et al .2024; Meng et al . 2025; Weng et al . 2026; Zhang et al . 2024b, 2025b]. However, single-vector latents may obscure temporal detail, moti-vating structured or autoregressive latent diffusion methods [Meng et al. 2024; Tu et al. 2025; Xiao et al. 2025; Zhu et al. 2025]. 

Composite text to motion. Many text-to-motion models [Chen et al .2023; Huang et al . 2024; Tevet et al . 2023; Zhang et al . 2023c] use a single textual token to encode the entire prompt, based on CLIP [Radford et al . 2021] or Sentence BERT [Reimers and Gurevych 2019] encoding. Others [Guo et al . 2025; Tevet et al . 2025] use a more detailed encoding of the prompt, based on BERT [Devlin et al .2019] or T5 [Raffel et al . 2020]. However, these works struggle when conditioned on prompts containing simultaneous actions. Some methods enrich text representations with finer-grained cues. CoMo [Huang et al . 2024] and FGMDM [Shi et al . 2023] incorporate GPT-4–generated keywords, while FineMoGen [Zhang et al . 2023a] use explicit spatial and temporal descriptions. GraphMotion [Jin et al . 2023] and CASIM [Chang et al . 2025] convert text into seman-tic graphs processed by graph-based reasoning and coarse-to-fine diffusion. SINC [Athanasiou et al . 2023] and STMC [Petrovich et al .2024] support co-occurring actions through timeline-level control by assigning text conditions to body parts, while GuidedMotion [Jin et al . 2024] construct an action tree to manipulate the diffused data. 

Attention editing in generative models. Attention control origi-nated in image diffusion and was later extended to motion. In the imaging domain, several works [Alaluf et al . 2023; Cao et al . 2023; Tumanyan et al . 2023] show that the self-attention layers encode structural information that can be used to edit an image without losing its original composition. Additional works [Chefer et al . 2023; Hertz et al . 2023] manipulate the cross-attention features combined with text, to affect specific image parts. Patashnik et al. [2023] and Dahary et al . [2024] manipulate the self- and cross-attention lay-ers to control the layout of the image and avoid semantic leakage between its different parts. Others [Geyer et al . 2024; Hertz et al .2024; Patashnik et al . 2024] use combinations of 𝑄 , 𝐾 , and 𝑉 for temporally and structurally consistent image and video editing. Only a small number of works in the motion domain leverage the potential of attention editing. MoMo [Raab et al . 2024a] pioneers this direction by using patterns encoded in self-attention. MotionCLR [Chen et al . 2024] extends attention editing to cross-attention, and Wu et al. [2025] manipulates attention for motion stylization. Our work, like MoMo, leverages attention features, but does so in a fundamentally different manner. We borrow ideas from Attend-And-Excite [Chefer et al . 2023], which modulates cross-attention sig-nals to strengthen underrepresented prompt tokens in the imaging domain. Similarly, we manipulate cross-attention scores. However, to account for the substantial differences between the motion and image domains, we employ tailored, prompt-specific parameteriza-tion, defined by choices such as token and layer selection. 

3 Motion Generation 

In the next two sections, we describe MultiAct, an unpaired, opti-mization based framework for improving text-to-motion alignment in composite multi-action scenarios. We show that cross-attention plays a key role in the “vanishing semantics” effect and use gradient-based guidance whose effectiveness depends on prompt-specific MultiAct • 3

parameter settings. To this end, these parameters are determined with the help of a decision scheme, named ParamGate, which out-puts a set of parameters tailored to a given prompt. Our framework is built upon a diffusion-based [Ho et al . 2020] gen-erative backbone, implemented with a transformer-decoder [Vaswani et al . 2017], that iteratively transforms a Gaussian noise 𝑋 𝑇 into a clean motion 𝑋 0 conditioned on a text prompt 𝑦 . Background on DDPM and 𝑋 0 prediction can be found in Appendix A.2. Our complete pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2, where given an input text prompt, our framework uses ParamGate to select the best parameters for that prompt (Sec. 4), applies our customized generation procedure (Sec. 3.2), and outputs the resulting motion. 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Motion Representation. Let 𝑋 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝐹 denote a motion sequence, where 𝑁 is the number of frames and 𝐹 represents the feature dimension per single frame. We follow the representation used in the HumanML3D dataset [Guo et al . 2022a], in which features from all joints (also known as pose) are concatenated into a single vector. Please refer to Appendix A.1 for more details. 

Cross-Attention Mechanism. Cross-attention plays a key role in our method, as it reflects the interaction between a motion latent and a textual prompt. Let 𝑋 𝑡,ℓ ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑑 1 denote the motion feature tensor at diffusion step 𝑡 and transformer layer ℓ, and let 𝐸 ∈ R𝑀 ×𝑑 2 denote the textual embedding of a prompt 𝑦 with 𝑀 tokens, where 𝑑 1, 𝑑 2

are latent dimensions. The cross-attention score 𝐴 is computed by 

𝐴 = Softmax 

 𝑄𝐾 𝑇 

√𝑑 



, 𝑄 = 𝑋 𝑡,ℓ 𝑊 𝑇 𝑄 , 𝐾 = 𝐸𝑊 𝑇 𝐾 , (1) where 𝐴 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑀 is the attention matrix for 𝑁 frames and 𝑀 tokens, 

𝑑 is its dimension, and 𝑊 𝑄 ,𝑊 𝐾 are learned weights. The score 𝐴 :,𝑚 

reflects the influence of token 𝑚 on the generated sequence. To recover omitted actions (or action-details), we use an opti-mization strategy that explicitly increases the attention score of underrepresented tokens, as described next. 

3.2 Attention-Guided Generation 

We define an underrepresented token as a text token with low cross-attention and weak influence on the generated motion. Next, we define an attention-alignment loss , L𝑎𝑡𝑛 , based on such tokens. Given an underrepresented token index 𝑚 , along with a specific diffusion step and transformer layer selected by our parameter-selection scheme (described later), we define: 

L𝑎𝑡𝑛 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

(1 − 𝐴 𝑖,𝑚 )2, (2) where 𝑖 is the frame number. This loss encourages the model to amplify attention to the underrepresented token along the temporal dimension. We update the motion latent 𝑋 via gradient descent: 

𝑋 ′ = 𝑋 − 𝜂 ∇𝑋 L𝑎𝑡𝑛 , (3) where 𝜂 is the refinement step size. This guidance steers the motion structure toward the textual semantics. See also Alg 1. Figure 3 and our supplementary video visualize the effect of attention guidance on the attention score and the generated motion. MDM* Backbone        

> MultiAct (ours) time
> “A person hops forward while raising his arms ”
> Fig. 3. Attention visualization. The colored heatmaps illustrate attention scores for the words “forward” (yellow) and “arms” (green). Our backbone assigns low attention to arm-related tokens, resulting in motions in which the arms are not raised. In contrast, our method assigns high attention scores to both tokens, producing a synchronized motion that faithfully reflects the prompt.

4 Tailored Parameter Selection 

The efficacy of modulation in Sec. 3.2 depends on the selection of appropriate parameters that ensure a meaningful alignment with the textual condition. Unfortunately, a configuration that succeeds for one prompt may fail for another. We demonstrate this dependency in our ablation study at Sec. 5.4. To achieve consistent high-fidelity results on a diverse range of prompts, we propose a decision scheme named ParamGate. Our scheme gets a conditioning text prompt as input and outputs a set of parameters tailored to that prompt. The selected parameters include the text token to amplify, the transformer layer used for guidance, and the number of diffusion steps over which the optimization is performed. Note that we strengthen only one token, which we find sufficient. This can be intuitively attributed to language embeddings, where a single token encodes other prompts via self-attention. Once the most effective parameters have been identified, we run guided generation (Sec. 3.2), as shown in Algs 1 and 2 and Fig. 4. In the following, we describe the components used by our decision scheme, namely the deviation measure, the parameter space, and the data. We then present the scheme in detail. 

Notation. We use 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) to denote the motion generated with attention guidance of input prompt 𝑦 and parameter combina-tion 𝜃 . We use 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) to denote the deviation measure (described next) computed for 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 ).

4.1 Text Alignment Deviation Measure 

Deviation values quantify the discrepancy between text and mo-tion semantics, where smaller deviations correspond to stronger text–motion alignment, as illustrated in the sanity check in Fig. 5. We build our deviation estimator on the established multi-modal distance measure introduced in T2M [Guo et al . 2022a], which com-putes the distance between motion and text embeddings. Our goal is to minimize the deviation. For convenience, we adopt the textual format “<prefix> while <suffix>” (e.g. a person is dancing while moving backwards ). However, 4 • Sala et al. 𝑋 "!, _                               

> 𝑋 "′
> yes
> Backbone
> Tailored
> Optimization
> no
> ×𝑇
> Tailored Optimization
> X′
> Backbone
> _,𝐴
> −𝜂 ∇!ℒ"#$ ×𝑟
> Diffuse
> 𝑋 #%&
> t>𝑡 ̂?
> 𝑋 "𝑦 𝜃 𝑡
> 𝑋 𝑦 𝑡
> Guided Generation
> 𝜃
> Fig. 4. Attention guided generation. This figure visualizes Algs 1 and 2. Left: Diffusion inference pipeline (Appendix A.2) with tailored optimization integrated. Tailored optimization modifies the data tensors 𝑋 𝑡 and is applied only for ˆ𝑡 diffusion steps, where ˆ𝑡 is tailored to the prompt 𝑦 . Right: Tailored optimization, in which 𝑋 is adjusted to increase cross-attention for a selected token and layer, encapsulated in 𝜃 and also tailored to the prompt. The optimization is driven by the loss L𝑎𝑡𝑛 [eq. (2)], which is parameterized by the selected token and layer. 𝜂 and 𝑟 are the optimization step size and number of iterations, respectively.

MultiAct is not restricted to this format and can operate on arbitrary syntactic structures. We evaluate prefix and suffix separately to weight all sentence parts equally. The final error is computed as the L2 norm of the prefix and suffix deviations. Since our deviation is a combination of two measures, we call it dual multi-modal distance .

4.2 Parameter Space Construction 

We construct a parameter set that encompasses combinations of tokens, layers, and diffusion ranges. This parameter space is large, making the selection of an optimal parameter combination for a given text prompt challenging. We therefore address parameter selection in two stages. First, we narrow the candidate parameter space using clustering-based pruning, motivated by the clear visual separation observed in the deviation plots, which produces a reduced parameter set Θ. Second, we employ a decision scheme described in Sec. 4.4, which applies lightweight non–deep-learning methods to identify the optimal set of guidance parameters. A text token index is denoted by 𝑚 ∈ [ 0, . . . , 𝑀 −1], where 𝑀 is the number of tokens in a given prompt, and a transformer layer is denoted by ℓ ∈ [ 0, . . . , 𝐿 −1], where 𝐿 is the number of layers. The number of diffusion steps over which guidance is applied is denoted by ˆ𝑡 , corresponding to the first ˆ𝑡 steps starting from step 𝑇 , where 

𝑇 is the total number of diffusion steps. Hence, the preliminary parameter set can be written as: 

Θpre ={𝑚, ℓ, ˆ𝑡 |𝑚 ∈ [ 0 . . . 𝑀 −1], ℓ ∈ [ 0 . . . 𝐿 −1], ˆ𝑡 ∈ [ 𝑇 −1 . . . 0]} . (4) To narrow this space, we examine deviation values of motions gen-erated for 𝜃 ∈ Θ across several text prompts, revealing a clear separation in which only a small subset of Θ yields low deviation. Figure 6 illustrates the deviation space in general and the visual separation between layers in particular. Each point represents the 

Algorithm 1 Tailored attention-guided optimization.  

> 1:

Function TailoredAttnOptim (𝑦, 𝜃, 𝜙, 𝐺, 𝑋, 𝑡 ) 

> 2:

Input: Prompt 𝑦 , predicted params. 𝜃 , fixed params. 𝜙 ,data tensor 𝑋 , current diffusion step 𝑡 , where 𝜃 = {𝑚, ℓ, ˆ𝑡 }

denotes the selected token index, transformer layer, and last diffusion guidance step, and 𝜙 = {𝜂, 𝑟 } denotes the op-timization step size and optimization steps, respectively  

> 3:

Output: optimized tensor 𝑋  

> 4:

if 𝑡 ≤ ˆ𝑡 then  

> 5:

return 𝑋  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

for 𝑟 iterations do  

> 8:

_, 𝐴 ← 𝐺 (𝑋, 𝑦, 𝑡 ) {𝐴 = [𝐴 1, . . . , 𝐴 𝐿 −1], where 𝐿 is #layers}  

> 9:

L𝑎𝑡𝑛 ← mean [( 1 − 𝐴 ℓ [:, 𝑚 ]) 2] 

> 10:

𝑋 ← 𝑋 − 𝜂 ∇𝑋 L𝑎𝑡𝑛  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return 𝑋 

deviation value for the prefix and suffix of a single motion instance from the set 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 )𝜃 ∈Θ, generated for a fixed prompt 𝑦 (“turns around while pointing forward”) across all combinations of parame-ters. The distance of a point from the origin corresponds to 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, 𝜃 )

(the dual multi-modal distance). The deviation space forms a curved manifold that reflects a clear trade-off: improving alignment for one part of the sentence typically corresponds to reduced alignment for the other. The region of interest, therefore, lies near the origin, where both sentence parts are well aligned with the prompt. While the figure shows the deviation space for a single text prompt, a similar structure consistently appears across different prompts. The instances in Fig. 6 are color-coded according to the layer ℓ

in the parameter combination (𝑚, ℓ, ˆ𝑡 ). We observe a clear visual separation, with the best text-aligned parameter combinations near the origin dominated by layers 3 to 5.To further support this observation, we use a small set of prompts, 

Ypre , and exhaustively generate attention-guided motions Ipre , to-gether with their deviation scores Epre :

Ipre = { 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) } ,

Epre = { 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) } 𝑦 ∈ Y pre , 𝜃 ∈ Θpre . (5) Within Epre , we cluster samples by their distance to the origin using k-means (k=2) and assign each layer to the “near” or “far” group only when the fraction of its samples in a cluster exceeds a confidence threshold; layers that do not meet this margin are labeled ambiguous. We repeat the procedure for tokens and steps too. This process narrows the set of text token indices to M, candidate layers to S,and diffusion step ranges to T , all detailed in Sec. 5.1. The narrowed sets are no longer separable via clustering and therefore require a more sophisticated scheme, which is provided by ParamGate. Altogether, our parameter space is narrowed down to 

Θ = {𝑚, ℓ, ˆ𝑡 |𝑚 ∈ M , ℓ ∈ S , ˆ𝑡 ∈ T } . (6) MultiAct • 5

Algorithm 2 Tailored attention-guided generation. Diffusion process with tailored attention guidance. We omit details such as prompt embeddings and layers surrounding the transformer in 𝐺 . 

> 1:

Function GuidedGeneration (𝑦, 𝜃, 𝜙, 𝐺,𝑇 ) 

> 2:

Input: Prompt 𝑦 , predicted params. 𝜃 , fixed params. 𝜙 ,pretrained diffusion model 𝐺 , and diffusion steps 𝑇  

> 3:

Output: Generated motion 𝑥 0 

> 4:

𝑋 ← N ( 0, 1) 

> 5:

for 𝑡 ← 𝑇 ,𝑇 − 1, . . . , 1 do  

> 6:

𝑋 ′ ← TailoredAttnOptim (𝑦, 𝜃, 𝜙, 𝐺, 𝑋, 𝑡 ) {Alg. 1}  

> 7:

ˆ𝑋 0, _ ← 𝐺 (𝑋 ′, 𝑦, 𝑡 ) {each step 𝑡 predicts a clean ˆ𝑋 0} 

> 8:

𝑋 ← Diffuse ( ˆ𝑋 0, 𝑡 ) {noise ˆ𝑋 0 to get 𝑥 𝑡 −1} 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return 𝑋 

4.3 Data Preparation 

We construct a set of prompts, Y, of plausible co-occurring actions (e.g. , “running while squatting” is not plausible). See Sec. 5.1 for de-tails. For each prompt and each parameter combination, we generate a motion, resulting in ∼30K motions. Finally, for each generated motion, we compute a text-alignment deviation error. Altogether: 

I = { 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) } ,

E = { 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, 𝜃 ) } 𝑦 ∈ Y , 𝜃 ∈ Θ. (7) The values in E then serve as a guide to our decision scheme. We gather all the above into a dataset, which we denote 

D = {Y , Θ, I, E} . (8) 

4.4 Decision Scheme 

Let 𝜃 (𝑦 ) denote the parameter combination 𝜃 = (𝑚, ℓ, ˆ𝑡 ) that yields the lowest deviation for a text prompt 𝑦 :

𝜃 (𝑦 ) = arg min  

> 𝜃 ∈Θ

𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, 𝜃 ). (9) We define the parameters and error extracted from ¯𝜃 (𝑦 ) as 

𝑚 (𝑦 ) = ¯𝜃 (𝑦 ) [ 𝑚 ],ℓ (𝑦 ) = ¯𝜃 (𝑦 ) [ ℓ],𝑡 (𝑦 ) = ¯𝜃 (𝑦 ) [ ˆ𝑡 ],𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 ) = 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦, ¯𝜃 (𝑦 )) .

(10) Given an unseen text prompt 𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ∉ Y, we use our decision scheme, ParamGate, to predict 𝜃 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ). Recall that Y is constructed under restrictive criteria, resulting in 100–200 prompts. Given the size of Y, we employ lightweight, non-deep learning-based methods. We analyze the nature of each parameter type and, based on this analysis, define a prediction strategy for each. The decision procedures defined below are evaluated in a cross-validation manner on the dataset D. In Sec. 5.2 we show that they are suitable choices. 

Selecting ℓ. To predict the layer ℓ, we analyze the set {ℓ (𝑦 )} 𝑦 ∈ Y 

and observe that the optimal guidance layer is shared across seman-tically similar prompts. Motivated by this observation, we employ a nearest-neighbor approach, in which unseen prompts adopt the layer assignment of the most similar prompt, identified as “A person hops forward while raising his arms” 

FP FN   

> max hands height suffix deviation
> Fig. 5. Deviation measure credibility. Visual sanity check for the devi-ation scores, where each point corresponds to a parameter combination; the vertical axis shows the suffix deviation, and the horizontal axis depicts a prompt-specific geometric heuristic based on maximum hand-shoulder distance. Low suffix deviation errors ( e.g. , green-circled) indicate correct generation of the suffix action (arm raising), which is also reflected by large hand-height values. In contrast, high errors ( e.g. , red-circled) corre-spond to failures. The absence of false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN) demonstrates the effectiveness of our measure in evaluating parameter combinations based on their degree of text–motion alignment.

ℓ = ¯ℓ (𝑦 𝑛𝑛 ), 𝑦 𝑛𝑛 = argmin 𝑦 ∈ Y diff (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 , 𝑦 ), (11) where diff (· , ·) is the L2 distance between CLS token embeddings. 

Selecting ˆ𝑡 . To predict ˆ𝑡 , the number of diffusion steps over which optimization is performed, we test the hypothesis that larger de-viations require guidance over more diffusion steps. To do so, we examine the set of tuples {𝑡 (𝑦 ), 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 )} 𝑦 ∈ Y . Note that 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 ) is the backbone error, not the error 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 ) of the optimal 𝜃 . We identify thresholds, {𝜅 𝑖 }𝑖 ∈ [ 0... | T |− 2] , by empirical risk minimization over 1D ordered classifiers using cumulative label counts. We generate 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ) using the backbone (no 𝜃 required when using the backbone), compute the deviation error 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ),and predict ˆ𝑡 using the previously detected thresholds: 

ˆ𝑡 =



𝑡 0, if 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ) ≤ 𝜅 0,𝑡 1, if 𝜅 0 < 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ) ≤ 𝜅 1,...𝑡 | T | − 1, if 𝜅 | T | − 2 < 𝑒𝑟𝑟 (𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 ),

(12) where 𝑡 0 > 𝑡 1 > · · · > 𝑡 | T | − 1, and 𝜅 0 < 𝜅 1 < · · · < 𝜅 | T | − 2.

Selecting 𝑚 . Finally, to predict 𝑚 , the token index in the input prompt, we propose test-time scaling. We use an LLM to identify all the verbs, action-details and adjectives in 𝑦 𝑛𝑒𝑤 (i.e. , ignore non-informative tokens like “person” and “his”). This process typically yields 3-4 candidate tokens. For each candidate, we generate a mo-tion and evaluate its deviation measure. We then select the token corresponding to the minimal deviation. All qualitative results in this work use a token 𝑚 selected by this procedure. Notably, we also suggest a faster but less accurate method where we simply sample a token out of the narrowed set M. Our quantitative results (Sec. 5.2) show that both methods outperform existing baselines. 6 • Sala et al. "A person turns around while pointing forward"            

> 010 20 50 60 70 30 40
> prefix deviation
> 40 60 80 100 120 140
> suffix deviation
> layer
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 76
> Fig. 6. Deviation space visualization . Each point corresponds to a single parameter combination and shows the prefix and suffix deviation values for the prompt shown above. Distance from the origin indicates the dual multi-modal distance. Points are color-coded by transformer layer ℓ, revealing a visual separation in which parameter combinations closest to the origin are dominated by layers 3to 5.

5 Experiments 5.1 Implementation Details 

For our optimization procedure, we set the size of the optimization step, 𝜂 , to 0.02 , and the number or repetition of optimization for each denoising step is 𝑟 = 18 .Our narrowed down parameter spaces, M, S, and T are defined as follows. Recall that they are selected from the full parameter spaces using a simple clustering method. The candidate layers for the optimization process are layers 3 to 5 (out of 8 layers in total); 

ˆ𝑡 should be chosen such that modulation would be applied only during the early, structure-forming steps of the reverse diffusion process. In practice, we narrow down ˆ𝑡 to 46 to 48 (out of 50 steps), i.e., optimization is applied for 1 to 3 diffusion steps. Our cluster analysis shows that the best performing tokens M are those classified as action-details (e.g., adverbs, directions, or man-ners) rather than verbs. This observation aligns with the intuition that in self-attention, information is shared across tokens during encoding. We hypothesize that action-detail tokens tend to encode both the details and the underlying action, whereas verb tokens mainly represent coarse action semantics. Consequently, action-detail tokens are more informative and better guide the prediction. Altogether, M = [action-details ], S = [3, 4, 5], T = [48 , 47 , 46 ].When measuring text alignment deviation errors, we determine each deviation value to be the average of deviation values for eight motions, 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 ), all created from the same prompt 𝑦 and the same parameter combination 𝜃 , but with different random seeds. 

Prompt set construction. Our prompt sets, Y𝑝𝑟𝑒 and Y, contain hard yet clear examples: challenging for most baselines but textually unambiguous (akin to GenEval [Ghosh et al . 2023] for images). Prompts must (a) be clear and definite, (b) have components that most baselines can generate individually, (c) combine components that most baselines struggle to generate jointly, (d) be human-doable, and (e) describe simultaneous (not sequential) actions. The preliminary set Y𝑝𝑟𝑒 contains 15 manually designed prompts with diverse actions and body parts, typically combining locomotion with instantaneous actions (e.g., punch while walking). It is used for initial analysis, focusing on motions with strong temporal signals that are easy to evaluate visually and via attention (e.g., arm lifting in Figs. 3 and 5). The final prompt set Y contains 140 prompts, generated with ChatGPT-5.2 using examples from (a) HumanML3D prompts of the form “<prefix> while <suffix>”, and (b) Y𝑝𝑟𝑒 . The (shortened) instruction is: “Create a sentence in the spirit of the examples, of the form ‘a person <prefix> while <suffix>’, where both parts contain actions and action details and can realistically occur simultaneously.” Both sets are refined through iterative filtering: prompts are gen-erated, motions synthesized by the backbone, easy cases removed, and harder variants added. For example, while the backbone suc-cessfully handles an action co-occurring with forward locomotion, it struggles when the same action co-occurs with backward loco-motion; therefore, we retain the latter. 

Backbone. Our denoising backbone is a modified version of MDM [Tevet et al . 2023], retrained on the HumanML3D dataset [Guo et al .2022a] and denoted MDM*. We use MDM’s transformer-decoder variant with text conditioning on BERT embeddings [Devlin et al .2019], where motion frames attend to each embedded text token. Adapting MultiAct to a new backbone requires a one-time con-struction of the motion set I =𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑦, 𝜃 )𝑦 ∈ Y ,𝜃 ∈Θ (approximately 

4K generations), which takes about two hours with 4 GPUs and a batch size of 8. 

Inference time. MultiAct incurs a ∼ × 2 overhead relative to back-bone inference time due to the optimization loop. Applying test-time scaling introduces an additional ∼ × 3 factor (for 2–3 tokens), result-ing in an overall of ∼ × 6 the backbone runtime. For comparison, STMC runs separately per body part, incurring a ∼ × 5 overhead. 

5.2 Quantitative Results 

Tab. 1 compares MultiAct with state-of-the-art baselines. 

Baselines. We compare our method against four baselines. Two of these are text-to-motion models that are not explicitly designed to handle simultaneous actions, while the remaining two incorporate mechanisms specifically tailored for simultaneous action modeling. The first group includes our backbone model, MDM*, and MoMask [Guo et al . 2024]. We include these baselines to demonstrate that the limitations addressed by our approach are common across a variety of text-to-motion models, both diffusion-based (MDM*) and VQ-VAE–based (MoMask). The latter group includes STMC [Petrovich et al . 2024] and a variation of Attend-and-Excite [Chefer et al . 2023], adapted to the motion domain. MoMask [Guo et al . 2024] represents a model class with an ar-chitecture that differs significantly from our backbone, MDM, as it uses a hierarchical vector-quantized token representation with masked and residual transformers. While both MDM and MoMask are considered state-of-the-art, their expressivity is limited, and our experiments show that they struggle with composite prompts. STMC [Petrovich et al . 2024] handles both simultaneous and se-quential motion generation, in which users are required to specify MultiAct • 7“A person is running while waving his arms”     

> MDM* Backbone MoMask STMC Attend & Excite* MultiAct (ours)

“A person jumps forward while raising his hands up”   

> Fig. 7. Qualitative results. Our method consistently maintains high motion quality and strong text alignment. In contrast, other baselines either attend to a single dominant verb, exhibit occasional floor penetration or motion artifacts, or produce unnatural results.

“A person is walking forward like a drunk while waving his arms ”     

> MDM* Backbone MoMask STMC Attend & Excite* MultiAct (ours)
> Fig. 8. Motion stylization . When prompted with motion stylization, existing methods fail either to generate both actions simultaneously or to incorporate the requested style. In contrast, our method supports motion stylization in parallel with multiple simultaneous actions, successfully integrating both into the generated motion. Note the characteristic imbalance in our result, reflecting the specified drunken style.

overlapping multi-track prompt intervals, based on body-part in-volvement. Since actions are assigned to body parts, the method struggles with simultaneous combinations of full-body and part-specific actions. STMC cannot handle adjectival modifiers (e.g., “a drunk person walks”), which constitutes a limitation of the method. To ensure a fair comparison, we reformulate our prompts to match the STMC input format (e.g., “a person walks like a drunk”). Even under this constraint, our method outperforms theirs. Attend-and-Excite [Chefer et al . 2023] is the method most closely related to our work, as it aims to strengthen specific textual tokens through optimization. With minimal modifications, we adapt it to the motion domain to enable comparison, and name the adapted version Attend-and-Excite*. There are several key differences be-tween their method and ours. First, Attend-and-Excite optimizes attention across all layers and 25 (out of 50) diffusion steps, whereas we restrict optimization to one selected layer and step. Second, while it maximizes attention towards a predefined target score, we instead perform a fixed number of optimization steps and optimize the mean attention score. Finally, Attend-and-Excite requires users to specify target tokens, whereas in the motion domain, users cannot reliably identify which tokens have the greatest effect; consequently, we introduce an automatic token-selection strategy. To ensure a fair comparison, we select the most appropriate tokens as their input. Our comparisons show that while their design choices are well-suited for images, they are not optimal for the motion domain. 

User Study. We use the term “user study” for clarity, although “per-ceptual study” is more precise in this case. We compare our frame-work with the baselines using three criteria: quality, text alignment, and overall preference. The user study comprises 28 comparisons in total, with 7 comparisons per baseline, each evaluated by 16-18 distinct users. A screenshot of our study can be found in Appen-dix B.1. Table 1 and Fig. 10 show that MultiAct is preferred over the models compared across all evaluation criteria. The prompts used in the user study are a small subset of Y, chosen to be simple and easy to evaluate visually, allowing clear judgment of success. 

Metrics. We evaluate both text alignment and motion quality. For text alignment, we use R Precision, Dual MultiModal Distance [Guo et al . 2022a] (where “dual” denotes the L2 norm of the prefix and suffix deviations), and the text-alignment score from our user study. To assess motion quality, we use the quality and user preference scores from our user study. Note that our dataset is unpaired; there-fore, metrics such as FID and diversity are not applicable. Diversity, however, is demonstrated in our qualitative results. 8 • Sala et al. “A person walks backwards while raising his hands up ”

Fig. 9. Motion diversity . When sampled multiple times with the same prompt and parameter combinations, MultiAct generates diverse, high-quality motions that consistently satisfy both simultaneous actions. Table 1. Comparison with baselines . MultiAct consistently outperforms the baselines across all categories on composite prompts. STMC, designed to accommodate co-occurring actions, ranks second in the user study. User study results reported here reflect Fig. 10, where our score is the average over comparisons with all baselines. Bold and underline denote best and second best, respectively. (·) ∗ indicates the method was adapted to align with our task. 

Method R Precision ↑ Dual MM Dist ↓ User Study ↑

Top1 Top2 Top3 Text Align. Quality Overall Pref. MDM* [2023] 0.08 0.22 0.32 110.64 2.49 13.53 8.74 MoMask [2024] 0.03 0.05 0.08 134.34 13.71 13.22 14.56 STMC [2024] 0.07 0.17 0.17 104.60 22.50 20.78 23.47 Attend & Excite* [2023] 0.03 0.05 0.08 116.44 13.54 17.71 20.00 MultiAct (Ours) Action-detail 0.14 0.19 0.27 96.07 N/A N/A N/A Test-time Scaling 0.11 0.30 0.32 85.16 86.94 83.69 83.30 Ours vs. 

> STMC
> 76.53% Preference
> 79.22% Quality
> 77.50% Text-Motion Alignment
> Ours vs.
> Attend&Excite*
> 80.00% Preference
> 82.29% Quality
> 86.46% Text-Motion Alignment
> Ours vs.
> MoMask
> 85.44% Preference
> 86.78% Quality
> 86.29% Text-Motion Alignment
> Ours vs.
> MDM* Backbone
> 91.26% Preference
> 86.47% Quality
> 97.51% Text-Motion Alignment

Fig. 10. User Study. Users vote that our model performs better than state-of-the-art models. The percentage indicates the proportion of votes in favor of our method, and the dashed line denotes the 50% mark. 

HumanML3D discussion and results. At first glance, the subset of the HumanML3D test set following the “<prefix> while <suffix>” format could serve as a suitable test set. However, this subset does not align with the objectives of our prompt set, which is designed to include examples that are both hard and clear (see Sec. 5.1). The requirement for hard prompts is not met, as approximately 40% of the prompts are relatively easy (e.g., “raise hands while walking for-ward”) and can be generated by most baselines. As a result, they do not allow us to distinguish between stronger and weaker baselines. (40% denotes prompts with backbone Dual MM-Dist below 50). The requirement for clear prompts is also not satisfied, as some prompts are linguistically complex and admit multiple interpretations (e.g., 

Table 2. Evaluation on HumanML3D “<prefix> while <suffix>” subset. 

MultiAct outperforms its backbone, despite the test set being suboptimal for our purposes. 

Method R Precision ↑ Dual MM Dist ↓ FID ↓ Diversity →

Top1 Top2 Top3 MDM* [2023] 0.14 0.24 0.31 59.65 3.39 8.06 

MultiAct 0.19 0.30 0.39 58.73 2.77 7.92 

containing more than 50 words and multiple overlapping actions), leading to unreliable metric scores. Nevertheless, we report results on this subset (539 prompts) in Table 2 and observe that MultiAct outperforms the backbone in all categories except one, in which it achieves comparable performance. 

5.3 Qualitative Results 

Our supplementary video best illustrates the quaity of our results, also shown in the following figures. Figures 7 and 8 compare our work with baselines. As shown in Figure 7, baselines struggle with simultaneous actions (MDM), produce unnatural motions or do not fully follow the text (MoMask), or exhibit floor penetration and minor artifacts (STMC). Attend-and-Excite proves ineffective for motion guidance, exhibiting corrupted motion that arises from the lack of prompt-tailored parameters, and applying attention guidance across all layers and over many diffusion steps. Figure 8 shows that, for composite prompts involving stylization, our method is the only one that successfully follows both the speci-fied actions and the style. In contrast, STMC, which is designed to MultiAct • 9“A person is running while waving his arms”  

> Fixed Parameters MultiAct (ours)

Fig. 11. Ablation. Left: Motion generated using a fixed parameter set se-lected according to the best-performing combination in Θ. Right: Motion generated for the same prompt with parameters selected by ParamGate. 

map actions to body parts, fails when combining full-body styles (“drunk”) with part-specific actions (“arms”). Lastly, Fig. 9 shows that MultiAct generates diverse motions using a selected parameter configuration with different seeds. 

5.4 Ablation 

Table 3 and Fig. 11, together with our supplementary video, reveal the contribution of components of our tailored attention guidance (Sec. 4). In the upper raw of Tab. 3 we use a fixed set of parameters, selected according to the best performing combination in Θ. This selection yields poor results, indicating that attention modulation in the motion domain is not robust to a single configuration. Introducing prompt-tailored parameter selection via ParamGate, we incrementally add selection schemes for each parameter, result-ing in progressively improved performance. Selecting the trans-former layer ℓ improves alignment, supporting our design choice to restrict guidance to specific layers, while incorporating adaptive diffusion-step range ˆ𝑡 further reduces deviation. Finally, for token se-lection, using identified action-detail tokens improves performance over fixed tokens, and test-time scaling achieves the strongest results at the cost of additional computation. 

6 Conclusion, Limitations, and Future Work 

We presented MultiAct, an unpaired, inference-time framework for text-to-motion generation from composite prompts involving simul-taneous actions. By strengthening cross-attention scores associated with underrepresented textual components, MultiAct mitigates van-ishing semantics without retraining the underlying motion model. Observing that effective attention modulation in the motion domain is highly prompt-dependent, we introduced ParamGate, a light-weight scheme that automatically selects prompt-tailored guidance parameters. Extensive quantitative, qualitative, and user-study eval-uations demonstrate that MultiAct improves semantic coverage of composite prompts while preserving motion realism, outperforming both general-purpose and composite-specific baselines. Despite its effectiveness, MultiAct has several limitations. While ParamGate substantially reduces manual tuning, its token-selection strategy relies on time-consuming test-time exploration or heuristic linguistic cues, incurring additional computational cost or poten-tially missing the most influential semantic element, respectively. Additionally, our method depends on the qualitative performance of its backbone and therefore inherits its limitations, such as motion 

Table 3. Ablation. Using a fixed parameter set yields poor results, while progressively introducing prompt-tailored selection of layers, steps, and tokens improves alignment, with test-time scaling performing best. 

Configuration R Precision ↑ Dual MM Dist ↓

Top1 Top2 Top3 Fixed parameters 0.08 0.16 0.19 105.97 ParamGate + Layer ℓ 0.08 0.14 0.19 100.02 + Step ˆ𝑡 0.08 0.19 0.22 99.38 + Token 𝑚 

Action-detail 0.14 0.19 0.27 96.08 Test-time Scaling 0.11 0.30 0.32 85.16 

artifacts, excessive smoothing or jitter. Future directions include extending our work to support more complex descriptions involv-ing multiple interacting semantic elements. We plan to explore this by developing more expressive parameter-selection strategies, ex-tending guidance to multiple tokens, and investigating associations between specific tokens and specific transformer layers. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank Theodoros Kyriakou for helping generate motions and Hila Chefer for fruitful discussions. This research was supported in part by the Israel Science Foundation (grants no. 2492/20 and 1473/24) and by Len Blavatnik and the Blavatnik Family Foundation. This research also received funding from the EU Commission’s Horizon Europe program (grant no. 101178362). 

References                        

> Yuval Alaluf, Daniel Garibi, Or Patashnik, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2023. Cross-Image Attention for Zero-Shot Appearance Transfer. arXiv:2311.03335 [cs.CV] Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. 2022. Teach: Temporal action composition for 3d humans. In 2022 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) . IEEE, IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 414–423. Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. 2023. SINC: Spatial Composition of 3D Human Motions for Simultaneous Action Generation. In
> IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (ICCV’23) . Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 9950–9961. doi:10.1109/ ICCV51070.2023.00916 Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. 2023. MasaCtrl: Tuning-Free Mutual Self-Attention Control for Consistent Image Synthesis and Editing. arXiv:2304.08465 [cs.CV] Che-Jui Chang, Qingze Tony Liu, Honglu Zhou, Vladimir Pavlovic, and Mubbasir Kapadia. 2025. CASIM: Composite Aware Semantic Injection for Text to Motion Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02063 1 (2025). Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2023. Attend-and-Excite: Attention-Based Semantic Guidance for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models.
> ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4, Article 148 (July 2023), 10 pages. doi:10.1145/3592116 Ling-Hao Chen, Wenxun Dai, Xuan Ju, Shunlin Lu, and Lei Zhang. 2024. Motion-CLR: Motion Generation and Training-free Editing via Understanding Attention Mechanisms. arxiv:2410.18977 1 (2024). Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, and Gang Yu. 2023. Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 18000–18010. Omer Dahary, Or Patashnik, Kfir Aberman, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2024. Be your-self: Bounded attention for multi-subject text-to-image generation. In Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 432–448. Wenxun Dai, Ling-Hao Chen, Jingbo Wang, Jinpeng Liu, Bo Dai, and Yansong Tang. 2024. Motionlcm: Real-time controllable motion generation via latent consistency

10 • Sala et al. 

model. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 390–408. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171–4186. doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423 Michal Geyer, Omer Bar-Tal, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. 2024. TokenFlow: Con-sistent Diffusion Features for Consistent Video Editing. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations . OpenReview.net, OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=daEqXJ0yZo Dhruba Ghosh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ludwig Schmidt. 2023. Geneval: An object-focused framework for evaluating text-to-image alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 52132–52152. Chuan Guo, Inwoo Hwang, Jian Wang, and Bing Zhou. 2025. Snapmogen: Human motion generation from expressive texts. arXiv:2507.09122 [cs.CV] Chuan Guo, Yuxuan Mu, Muhammad Gohar Javed, Sen Wang, and Li Cheng. 2024. Momask: Generative masked modeling of 3d human motions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 1900–1910. Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. 2022a. Generating Diverse and Natural 3D Human Motions from Text. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (CVPR’22) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 5142–5151. doi:10.1109/CVPR52688.2022. 00509 Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, and Li Cheng. 2022b. Tm2t: Stochastic and tok-enized modeling for the reciprocal generation of 3d human motions and texts. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 580–597. Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Shihao Zou, Qingyao Sun, Annan Deng, Minglun Gong, and Li Cheng. 2020. Action2Motion: Conditioned Generation of 3D Human Motions. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia 

(Seattle, WA, USA) (MM ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021–2029. doi:10.1145/3394171.3413635 Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2023. Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . OpenRe-view.net, OpenReview.net. Amir Hertz, Andrey Voynov, Shlomi Fruchter, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2024. Style aligned image generation via shared attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 4775–4785. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 6840–6851. Daniel Holden, Jun Saito, and Taku Komura. 2016. A deep learning framework for character motion synthesis and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 35, 4 (2016), 1–11. Yiming Huang, Weilin Wan, Yue Yang, Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar, and Lingjie Liu. 2024. Como: Controllable motion generation through language guided pose code editing. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 180–196. Muhammad Gohar Javed, Chuan Guo, Li Cheng, and Xingyu Li. 2024. Inter-mask: 3d human interaction generation via collaborative masked modeling. arXiv:2410.10010 [cs.CV] Biao Jiang, Xin Chen, Wen Liu, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, and Tao Chen. 2024. MotionGPT: Human Motion as a Foreign Language. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 36 (2024). Peng Jin, Hao Li, Zesen Cheng, Kehan Li, Runyi Yu, Chang Liu, Xiangyang Ji, Li Yuan, and Jie Chen. 2024. Local Action-Guided Motion Diffusion Model for Text-to-Motion Generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (Milan, Italy). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 392–409. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-72698-9_23 Peng Jin, Yang Wu, Yanbo Fan, Zhongqian Sun, Wei Yang, and Li Yuan. 2023. Act as you wish: Fine-grained control of motion diffusion model with hierarchical semantic graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 15497–15518. Zichong Meng, Zeyu Han, Xiaogang Peng, Yiming Xie, and Huaizu Jiang. 2025. Absolute Coordinates Make Motion Generation Easy. arXiv:2505.19377 [cs.CV] Zichong Meng, Yiming Xie, Xiaogang Peng, Zeyu Han, and Huaizu Jiang. 2024. Rethink-ing diffusion for text-driven human motion generation. arXiv:2411.16575 [cs.CV] Or Patashnik, Rinon Gal, Daniel Cohen-Or, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Fernando De la Torre. 2024. Consolidating attention features for multi-view image editing. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. Or Patashnik, Daniel Garibi, Idan Azuri, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2023. Localizing Object-Level Shape Variations with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 23051–23061. Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. 2021. Action-Conditioned 3D Human Motion Synthesis with Transformer VAE. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 10985–10995. Mathis Petrovich, Or Litany, Umar Iqbal, Michael J. Black, Gül Varol, Xue Bin Peng, and Davis Rempe. 2024. Multi-Track Timeline Control for Text-Driven 3D Human Motion Generation. In EEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW’24) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 1911–1921. doi:10.1109/CVPRW63382.2024.00197 Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Muhammad Saleem, Korrawe Karunratanakul, Pu Wang, Hongfei Xue, Chen Chen, Chuan Guo, Junli Cao, Jian Ren, and Sergey Tulyakov. 2025. Maskcontrol: Spatio-temporal control for masked motion synthesis. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 9955–9965. Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Muhammad Usama Saleem, Pu Wang, Minwoo Lee, Srijan Das, and Chen Chen. 2024a. Bamm: Bidirectional autoregressive motion model. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 172–190. Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Pu Wang, Minwoo Lee, and Chen Chen. 2024b. Mmm: Gener-ative masked motion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 1546–1555. Wei Qian, Gaoji Su, Dan Guo, Jinxing Zhou, Xiaobai Li, Bin Hu, Shengeng Tang, and Meng Wang. 2025a. PhysDiff: Physiology-based Dynamicity Disentangled Diffusion Model for Remote Physiological Measurement. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 39. AAAI Press, Washington DC, USA, 6568–6576. Yijun Qian, Jack Urbanek, Alexander Hauptmann, and Jungdam Won. 2025b. Text Motion Translator: A Bi-directional Model for Enhanced 3D Human Motion Gener-ation from Open-Vocabulary Descriptions. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten Sattler, and Gül Varol (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 398–414. Sigal Raab, Inbar Gat, Nathan Sala, Guy Tevet, Rotem Shalev-Arkushin, Ohad Fried, Amit Haim Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2024a. Monkey see, monkey do: Harness-ing self-attention in motion diffusion for zero-shot motion transfer. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. Sigal Raab, Inbal Leibovitch, Guy Tevet, Moab Arar, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2024b. Single Motion Diffusion. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . OpenReview.net, OpenReview.net. https:// openreview.net/pdf?id=DrhZneqz4n Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al . 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, PMLR, PMLR, 8748–8763. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 140 (2020), 1–67. http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html Royi Rassin, Eran Hirsch, Daniel Glickman, Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Gal Chechik. 2023. Linguistic Binding in Diffusion Models: Enhancing Attribute Corre-spondence through Attention Map Alignment. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Eds.), Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 57 Morehouse LaneRed Hook, NY, United States, 3536–3559. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2023/file/0b08d733a5d45a547344c4e9d88bb8bc-Paper-Conference.pdf Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Stroudsburg, PA , USA, 3982–3992. Yoni Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit Haim Bermano. 2024. Human Motion Diffusion as a Generative Prior. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . OpenReview.net, OpenReview.net. Xu Shi, Chuanchen Luo, Junran Peng, Hongwen Zhang, and Yunlian Sun. 2023. Gener-ating fine-grained human motions using chatgpt-refined descriptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02772 1 (2023). Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Setareh Cohan, Daniele Reda, Zhengyi Luo, Xue Bin Peng, Amit Haim Bermano, and Michiel van de Panne. 2025. CLoSD: Closing the Loop between Simulation and Diffusion for multi-task character control. In The Thir-teenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . OpenReview.net, OpenReview.net. Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano. 2023. Human Motion Diffusion Model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’23) . OpenReview.net, OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJ1kSyO2jwu Linnan Tu, Lingwei Meng, Zongyi Li, Hefei Ling, and Shijuan Huang. 2025. Autore-gressive Motion Generation with Gaussian Mixture-Guided Latent Sampling. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . Curran MultiAct • 11 

Associates Inc., 57 Morehouse LaneRed Hook, NY, United States. Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. 2023. Plug-and-Play Diffusion Features for Text-Driven Image-to-Image Translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 1921–1930. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). Wanjiang Weng, Xiaofeng Tan, Junbo Wang, Guo-Sen Xie, Pan Zhou, and Hongsong Wang. 2026. ReAlign: Text-to-Motion Generation via Step-Aware Reward-Guided Alignment. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 40, 13 (Mar. 2026), 10621–10629. doi:10.1609/aaai.v40i13.38035 Linjun Wu, Xiangjun Tang, Jingyuan Cong, He Wang, Bo Hu, Xu Gong, Songnan Li, Yuchen Liao, Yiqian Wu, Chen Liu, et al . 2025. Semantically Consistent Text-to-Motion with Unsupervised Styles. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. Lixing Xiao, Shunlin Lu, Huaijin Pi, Ke Fan, Liang Pan, Yueer Zhou, Ziyong Feng, Xiaowei Zhou, Sida Peng, and Jingbo Wang. 2025. MotionStreamer: Streaming Motion Generation via Diffusion-based Autoregressive Model in Causal Latent Space. arXiv:2503.15451 [cs.CV] Jianrong Zhang, Yangsong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoli Huang, Yong Zhang, Hongwei Zhao, Hongtao Lu, and Xi Shen. 2023c. T2M-GPT: Generating Human Motion from Textual Descriptions with Discrete Representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA. Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. 2024a. MotionDiffuse: Text-Driven Human Motion Generation With Diffusion Model. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 46, 6 (June 2024), 4115–4128. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3355414 Mingyuan Zhang, Huirong Li, Zhongang Cai, Jiawei Ren, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. 2023a. Finemogen: Fine-grained spatio-temporal motion generation and editing. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 13981–13992. Pengfei Zhang, Pinxin Liu, Pablo Garrido, Hyeongwoo Kim, and Bindita Chaudhuri. 2025a. Kinmo: Kinematic-aware human motion understanding and generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 11187–11197. Qinsheng Zhang, Jiaming Song, Xun Huang, Yongxin Chen, and Ming-Yu Liu. 2023b. Diffcollage: Parallel generation of large content with diffusion models. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE, IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC, USA, 10188–10198. Zeyu Zhang, Akide Liu, Ian Reid, Richard Hartley, Bohan Zhuang, and Hao Tang. 2024b. Motion mamba: Efficient and long sequence motion generation. In Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, Springer International Publishing, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 265–282. Zeyu Zhang, Yiran Wang, Danning Li, Dong Gong, Ian Reid, and Richard Hartley. 2025b. Flashmo: Geometric interpolants and frequency-aware sparsity for scalable efficient motion generation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . Curran Associates Inc., 57 Morehouse LaneRed Hook, NY, United States. Bingfan Zhu, Biao Jiang, Sunyi Wang, Shixiang Tang, Tao Chen, Linjie Luo, Youyi Zheng, and Xin Chen. 2025. MotionGPT3: Human Motion as a Second Modality. arXiv:2506.24086 [cs.CV] 

Appendix 

This appendix adds details on top of the ones given in the main paper. While the main paper stands on its own, the details given here may shed more light. In Sec. A we provide more details about the preliminaries of our work: motion representation, and the models MDM and DDPM. In Sec. B, we provide a visualization of the user study. 

A Preliminaries - More Details A.1 Motion Representation 

Recall that 𝑁 denotes the number of frames in a motion sequence, 

𝐹 denotes the length of the features describing a single frame, and 

𝑋 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝐹 denotes a motion. Additionally, let 𝐽 be the number of skeletal joints. Each feature is redundantly represented with the joint angles, positions, velocities, and foot contact [Guo et al . 2022a]. Each single pose is defined by 

( ¤ 𝑟 𝑎 , ¤𝑟 𝑥 , ¤𝑟 𝑧 , 𝑟 𝑦 , 𝑗 𝑝 , 𝑗 𝑟 , 𝑗 𝑣 , 𝑐 𝑓 ) ∈ R𝐹 ,

where ¤𝑟 𝑎 ∈ R is the root angular velocity along the Y-axis. ¤𝑟 𝑥 , ¤𝑟 𝑧 ∈ R

are root linear velocities on the XZ-plane, and 𝑟 𝑦 ∈ R is the root height. 𝑗 𝑝 ∈ R3(𝐽 −1) , 𝑗 𝑟 ∈ R6(𝐽 −1) and 𝑗 𝑣 ∈ R3𝐽 are the local joint positions, velocities, and rotations relative to the root, and 𝑐 𝑓 ∈ R4

are binary features denoting the foot contact labels for four foot joints (two for each leg). 

A.2 MDM and DDPM 

Our backbone, a modified version of MDM [Tevet et al . 2023], uses DDPMs [Ho et al . 2020]. In the following paragraph, we recap the mechanism of DDPM. An input motion 𝑥 0, is subjected to a Markov noise process con-sisting of T steps, resulting in the sequence {𝑥 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =0, such that 

𝑞 (𝑥 𝑡 |𝑥 𝑡 −1) = N ( √𝛼 𝑡 𝑥 𝑡 −1, (1 − 𝛼 𝑡 )𝐼 ), (13) where 𝛼 𝑡 ∈ ( 0, 1) are constant hyperparameters. When 𝛼 𝑡 is small enough, we can approximate 𝑥 𝑇 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ).

𝑥 0 can be modeled via the reversed diffusion process by gradually cleaning 𝑥 𝑇 , using a generative network 𝑝 𝜃 . MDM [Tevet et al . 2023] predicts the input motion, denoted ˆ𝑥 0, rather than 𝜖 𝑡 , such that 

ˆ𝑥 0 = 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡 ). Then, the widespread diffusion loss is applied: 

Lsimple = E𝑡 ∼[ 1,𝑇 ] ∥𝑥 0 − 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡 )∥ 22. (14) During inference, synthesis iterates from pure noise 𝑥 𝑇 . In each iteration, the denoising network 𝑝 𝜃 predicts a clean version of the current sample 𝑥 𝑡 . The predicted clean sample ˆ𝑥 0 is then “re-noised" to create the next sample 𝑥 𝑡 −1, repeatedly until 𝑡 = 0.

B Experiments - More Details B.1 User Study - Screenshot Visualization 

Our user study displays a pair of video clips on each of its pages, requesting the user to select the one that is more suitable for the examined attribute, which is either quality, text alignment, or overall preference. A representative screenshot is shown in Fig. 12. 12 • Sala et al. Text Descript ion :

a person  is walki ng whi le sw ingi ng bot h arms from lef t to righ t

Mot ion A

▶ Play/Paus e A

Mot ion B

▶ Play/Paus e B

⏸ Play / Paus e All 

1. Which mot ion is of highe r qu ality ?

You may cons ide r:

- Does the mot ion loo k natur al and app ea r like som ethi ng a rea l person migh t do?

- Does the mot ion loo k ji tt ery or not smoot h?

- Does the cha rac ter's cont ac t with the groun d loo k sol id and corr ec t?

Mot ion A

Much Bett er

Mot ion A

Sligh tly Bett er

Similar Mot ion B

Sligh tly Bett er

Mot ion B

Much Bett er

2. Which mot ion be tt er ref lec ts the text de script ion ?

You may cons ide r:

- How acc ur ately does each mot ion match the sp ecific verbs us ed in the text de script ion ?

Action de tai ls are semant ic constr ai nts , su ch as ad verbs, di rec tion and mann er.

- Does it follow  all  of the m?

Mot ion A

Much Bett er

Mot ion A

Sligh tly Bett er

Similar Mot ion B

Sligh tly Bett er

Mot ion B

Much Bett er

3. Overall , which mot ion do you pr efe r?

- Which mot ion do you fi nd mor e app ea ling?

Mot ion A Same Mot ion B

Vide o 1 of 14 

Next Mot ion Pai r →

Fig. 12. A screenshot of our user study. Note that each human figure in the screenshot is played as a video.