PartiCam: Camera Controlled Video Generation with Reward Guidance
Amine Ouasfi3, Runjia Li2, Junlin Han1,2, Eric Marchand3, Philip H.S. Torr2, Adnane Boukhayma3
1 Meta
2 University of Oxford
3 INRIA, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA
Figure 1. Our method improves camera controlled video generation. We show a top-down view of the estimated camera trajectories from
the videos generated with our method, its baselines and the Ground-truth. We show improvement over TrajectoryCrafter [82], and NVS-
Solver[78] using both SVD (top) [7] and CogVideo (Bottom) [33] backbones.
1. Abstract
We present PartiCam, a training-free Particle filtering
rooted method for improved Camera controlled video gen-
eration. Generating videos that follow a precisely speci-
fied camera trajectory remains challenging for large video
diffusion models. Training-free approaches are backbone-
agnostic and avoid the need to construct large camera-
annotated datasets by steering pretrained models toward
the desired camera motion at test time. This enables the
generation of camera-controlled video data that can sub-
sequently be used to train camera-conditioned video diffu-
sion models. Existing sampling-based guidance approaches
often suffer from unstable trajectories: they either explore
too broadly and fail to respect the target camera motion or
collapse early and lose visual diversity over time. We in-
troduce a global–local refinement framework for diffusion
reward guidance, enabling accurate and consistent camera
control during video generation. Our method builds on Se-
quential Monte-Carlo (SMC) guidance, but introduces a lo-
cal refinement stage based on particle filtered resampling.
Experiments show large improvements in camera trajectory
adherence, reduced drift, and better visual quality, without
1
arXiv:2609.39504v1  [cs.CV]  30 Sep 2026


requiring model retraining.
2. Introduction
Recent advances in multimodal generation via diffusion and
flow models have revolutionized creative fields, giving rise
to video generation models [11, 18, 53, 55, 83] of im-
pressive quality alongside emerging zero-shot generaliza-
tion capabilities [68].
Yet these models often lack fine-
grained control mechanisms. Building generation models
that are action-conditioned, causally and physically control-
lable, and 3D-grounded represents a key step toward the vi-
sion of comprehensive world models. Open-source latent
video models such as SVD [7], CogVideo [33, 75], Wan
[67], and Hunyuan [41], etc. provide a practical and man-
ageable testbed for developing ideas that can scale to larger
models and broader modalities.
Among the most important axes of control in visual data
is camera viewpoint, which accounts for a dominant source
of variation in images and videos and arguably offers the
most intuitive form of control for these modalities. The
task of camera trajectory control in video generation from
a single reference image, sparse views, or a few frames
of a dynamic scene is closely analogous to few-shot novel
view synthesis [37, 48]: the video model serves as a spatio-
temporal prior that enables educated completion of unob-
served viewpoints. The notorious difficulty of these tasks
in classical computer vision and graphics underscores their
inherent challenges, chief among them ensuring 3D and 4D
scene consistency alongside photorealistic inpainting of oc-
cluded regions. Camera control can be achieved by training
conditional models from scratch or via adapter like fine-
tuning [29, 82]. However, the scarcity of large-scale paired
supervision, prohibitive computational training costs, and
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization failures on chal-
lenging geometries or novel camera trajectories can make
such approaches expensive or suboptimal. A further, more
practical concern is obsolescence: open-source latent video
models are evolving rapidly, and a control module fine-
tuned for one backbone is bound to that backbone’s archi-
tecture, latent space, and conditioning interface, so it risks
being superseded before it is widely adopted. Training-free
methods, by contrast, are largely backbone-agnostic and in-
herit the improvements of each new generation of base mod-
els at no additional training cost.
This motivates training-free,
test-time alternatives,
which have become an increasingly active direction. Be-
yond their immediate utility, we argue that such methods are
also a prerequisite for the training-based approaches they
appear to compete with: a reliable test-time procedure is
a generator of paired camera-annotated video data, whose
samples can be distilled back into model weights. This mir-
rors the trajectory of LLM post-training, where sampling
from a model and fine-tuning on the verified subset, i.e. re-
jection sampling fine-tuning [60, 84, 85], converts an expen-
sive inference-time procedure into cheap model capability,
and where the filter proved far easier to construct than the
generator.
One of the established approaches to training-free cam-
era control is score modulation (e.g. [78]): at each denois-
ing step, the score function is adjusted using warped input
views as scene priors, steering the latent trajectory toward
the target camera pose. We build on this formulation with-
out loss of generality as our underlying control mechanism.
Despite its effectiveness, score modulation operates over a
single denoising trajectory. Errors made early in sampling,
when an unlucky noise realization places the model on a
poor generative path, compound through subsequent steps
and become increasingly difficult to correct, leading to per-
sistent camera drift even as the number of inference steps
increases.
One natural remedy is to introduce stochastic restarts
[73] during sampling:
by re-injecting forward-diffusion
noise into an intermediate latent and re-denoising, the
model is given an opportunity to escape poor generative tra-
jectories and recover camera consistency. However, unre-
stricted restarts are unstable in practice and can severely de-
grade generation quality by discarding useful structure ac-
cumulated during denoising. To stabilize restarts, we pro-
pose equipping them with reward-guided resampling: at
each restart, we draw N perturbed candidate continuations
via noising-denoising, score each against a camera align-
ment reward, and retain the best according to these scores.
Our formulation can support both differentiable and non-
differentiable reward functions, enabling flexible integra-
tion of arbitrary camera consistency or visual quality met-
rics. This local procedure, which we term PF-Restart, sub-
stantially improves trajectory coherence.
Yet because it
operates independently for each candidate, it provides no
mechanism to leverage a broader population of trajectories
for global exploration, and is therefore still susceptible to
collective drift when all candidates enter a similarly poor
region of latent space.
We address this by embedding local PF-Restart within a
global Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) framework. Rather
than steering a single trajectory, our method maintains a
population of K candidate video trajectories (i.e. particles)
which are jointly propagated through the denoising process
and globally reweighted and resampled according to how
well they satisfy the target camera trajectory and desired vi-
sual properties. High-reward particles are preferentially re-
tained and diversified via local PF-Restart restarts, whereas
low-reward ones are discarded, giving the sampler a princi-
pled mechanism to continuously reallocate compute toward
geometrically coherent and visually appealing trajectories.
This combination of global population filtering and local
reward-guided refinement empirically mitigates early drift,
2


avoids collapse into low-quality or geometrically inconsis-
tent solutions, and preserves sample diversity – limitations
that plague both score modulation and unrestricted restart
strategies individually. Importantly, our method is not lim-
ited to the training-free setting: it can be applied on top of
trained camera control baselines (e.g. [29, 82]), mitigating
some of their OOD generalization failures on challenging
geometries or out-of-distribution trajectories.
We validate our approach through quantitative and qual-
itative evaluation on video reshooting from images and
videos for static and dynamic scenes, following the ex-
perimental protocol of NVSSolver [78].
Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance across these bench-
marks, yielding superior visual results and stronger con-
sistency with the desired camera trajectory, with improve-
ments over both popular training-free [78] and training-
based [82] methods.
In summary, our contributions are:
• A training-free strategy for enhanced camera control in
video model generation via reward-guidance combining
global SMC trajectory exploration with local particle fil-
tering steered restarts (PF-Restart).
• Analysis of reward functions that benefit the task of cam-
era control in this context.
• Demonstrated improvements over both training-free and
training-based camera control state-of-the-art methods,
hedging against score modulation drift and OOD gener-
alization limits respectively.
• State-of-the-art performance on video re-shooting bench-
marks across single-image and monocular video settings.
3. Related Work
Controllable Diffusion Models.
Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models [32] and efficient samplers such
as DDIM [58] and DPM-Solver [45] have become the
dominant generative paradigm for images and video,
with latent diffusion models [57] enabling scalable high-
resolution synthesis.
Training-based controlled genera-
tion paradigms including ControlNet [87], IP-Adapter [76],
T2I-Adapter [50], and classifier-free guidance [31] re-
quire paired training data and considerable computa-
tional resources.
In contrast, training-free Guidance en-
able control without parameter update and with fractional
cost. Inference-time steering of diffusion models generally
falls into three categories: noise/attention manipulation,
gradient-based guidance, and particle filtering. Attention-
based methods (e.g. [1, 30, 34, 42, 49]) are effective for
image and video editing but difficult to adapt to com-
plex geometric 3D constraints.
Gradient-based methods
(e.g. [5, 16, 80? ]) utilize auxiliary energy functions to steer
the denoising process. DPS [15], for instance injects differ-
entiable likelihoods directly into the reverse process. How-
ever, computing gradients through a video diffusion model
at every step is computationally expensive and prone to high
variance. Our method belongs to the third category, using
reward-weighted Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) to steer
the generation without requiring expensive gradient back-
propagation.
Stochastic Sampling and Restart Mechanisms.
Song et
al. [59] establish predictor-corrector samplers under the
SDE framework, showing that mid-trajectory Langevin
corrections reduce deviation from the data manifold.
CCDF [14] enforces conditioning via partial forward–
reverse noise cycles, and MCG [13] projects corrector steps
onto the data manifold.
RePaint [47] alternates noising
and denoising to harmonize inpainted regions with their
surroundings; Restart [73] periodically re-injects noise to
escape low-quality basins; ZigZag [4] parameterises the
schedule as learnable forward–backward passes. All act as
local annealing but lack principled weighting across candi-
dates. Our PF-Restart component formalises this as particle
filtering with reward-weighted resampling at each selected
timestep, turning ad hoc noise injection into a principled
selection procedure.
Inference-Time Alignment and Sequential Monte Carlo.
A growing body of work frames conditional diffusion as
reward alignment via Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) [19,
22], motivated by the shift toward post-training optimisa-
tion [62]. Tweedie’s formula [23] enables reward evalu-
ation throughout the denoising chain without model up-
dates.
TDS [70] constructs twisted proposals targeting
a reward-weighted posterior; Dou and Song [21] connect
DPS to exact Kalman filtering.
Kim et al. [39] com-
bine SMC with adaptive resampling to avoid reward over-
optimisation, and Kim et al. [38] scale inference-time com-
pute for flow models. Ψ-Sampler [77] shows that Gaus-
sian prior initialisation wastes particle diversity in low-
reward regions, and proposes pCNL as a dimension-robust,
gradient-informed MCMC sampler to draw initial particles
from the reward-aware posterior, yielding consistent gains
on layout, counting, and aesthetic tasks. SMC has also been
applied to protein design [61] and language decoding [51].
Training-based aligners such as DPOK [25], DDPO [6], and
RAFT [20] require parameter updates and are orthogonal to
our approach. Our global SMC stage builds on TDS weight-
ing and shares Ψ-Sampler’s motivation of targeting reward-
relevant regions early in the chain, extended to the video
latent space for camera trajectory alignment.
Camera-Controlled Generation.
Stand-alone models
like NeRF [48] and 3DGS [37] can learn scene-specific 3D
representations renderable from any viewpoint given cali-
brated multi-view images. Dynamic versions can render
dynamic scenes [46, 54, 56, 69] by modeling typically a
3


canonical 3D and deformation fields jointly. Data and reg-
ularization priors result in versions that are less likely to
break under sparse input views [9, 10, 12, 52, 72, 74, 79].
However, reconstruction-based approaches are limited to
observed geometry and struggle with large viewpoint ex-
trapolation or disocclusions. Some of these limitations can
be mitigated with hybrid methods distilling image or video
diffusion priors into explicit 3D representations [2, 44, 64].
Feed-forward multi-view diffusion models synthesize new
viewpoints from one or few images [8, 24, 27, 43, 63].
While requiring costly multi-view training data, many re-
main restricted to static or short-baseline settings with lim-
ited temporal consistency.
4. Method
We propose a probabilistic control framework for diffusion-
based video generation models, designed to steer the gen-
eration process toward a desired camera trajectory.
Our
method operates in the latent space of the diffusion model,
maintaining and refining a population of stochastic trajec-
tories. The procedure combines a global Sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC) component for trajectory exploration and a lo-
cal refinement component that merges particle filtering with
Restarts [4, 47, 73].
4.1. Problem Setting
Let Dθ denote a video diffusion model with parameters θ,
which defines a stochastic generative process over a se-
quence of latent states along the sampling trajectory z0:T =
(z0, . . . , zT ):
pθ(z0:T ) = p(zT )
T −1
Y
t=0
pθ(zt | zt+1),
and the generated video is decoded from the latent z0 as
x0 = Gθ(z0).
We aim to sample trajectories that follow a target camera
path and exhibit desired properties such as background con-
sistency, motion smoothness, high aesthetic quality, quanti-
fied by reward functions
R(zt) =
X
i=1
αiRi(xt),
where each Ri is a user-defined reward measuring align-
ment between the generated views and the intended camera
trajectory or motion constraints, weighted by αi.
4.2. Preliminaries: Score Modulation for Camera
Control
To control video diffusion models at inference time, we
adopt score modulation via a latent transformation that ad-
justs the current latent zt based on the input view and the
target camera pose. Methods such as NVS-Solver [78] ap-
ply this principle by warping the conditioning image to the
target viewpoint and injecting the warped features into the
denoising update. Throughout the paper, we follow this for-
mulation and treat the score of Dθ as the modulated score.
Please refer to [78] for exhaustive details.
A fundamental limitation of Score Modulation methods
is that errors made early in sampling compound and become
difficult to correct later, even when increasing the number
of inference steps. When the early noise realization places
sampling on a poor generative trajectory, the model often re-
mains trapped there, resulting in camera drift confirmed by
high ATE scores in our experiments (see Table 2). One way
to mitigate this problem efficiently is to introduce stochastic
perturbations in the form of Restarts [73] during sampling to
recover correct camera trajectories by escaping such failure
modes. Yet, in practice, unrestricted restarts are unstable
and can degrade generation quality. To stabilize this mech-
anism, we propose to incorporate inference-time alignment
[62] and convert the stochastic exploration into a structured
filtering procedure.
We employ Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) as an
inference-time guidance mechanism.
SMC naturally fil-
ters trajectory candidates by assigning each particle an im-
portance weight derived from the reward and resampling
the population so that high-reward trajectories, i.e. those
consistent with the target camera motion and desired vi-
sual quality, are preferentially retained.
This filtering is
applied globally across a population of particles through-
out the diffusion process, allowing the sampler to continu-
ously steer generation toward trajectories that remain both
geometrically coherent and visually appealing. In paral-
lel, each particle undergoes a local restart procedure: from
its latent state zt, we draw Nr perturbations by injecting
forward-diffusion noise and then denoise each one back to
time t. These proposals constitute a local candidate set on
which we again apply reward-weighted resampling during
the backward update. The combination of global population
filtering and local restart-based refinement mitigates early
drift, avoids collapse into low-quality or geometrically in-
consistent trajectories, and yields temporally stable video
samples that follow the prescribed motion while maintain-
ing high aesthetic fidelity.
4.3. Global Trajectory Exploration via SMC
We aim to sample trajectories from a reward-weighted dif-
fusion path distribution [22, 70]. :
p(z0:T | R) ∝pθ(z0:T ) exp
 βR(x0)

,
(1)
where z0:T denotes the latent diffusion trajectory, pθ(z0:T )
is the diffusion prior induced by the reverse process, and
R(x0) is an aesthetic reward evaluated on the decoded
video x0.
4


Figure 2. One denoising step with Global SMC.
To approximate this distribution we employ a Sequential
Monte Carlo sampler with K particles:
{(z(k)
t
, w(k)
t
)}K
k=1,
which represents a weighted approximation of the interme-
diate target distributions.
Sequential target distributions.
Following the SMC
framework, we define a sequence of intermediate targets:
γt(zt:T ) ∝pθ(zt:T ) ψt(zt),
(2)
where ψt(zt) is a twisting potential representing the ex-
pected future reward conditioned on the current latent state:
ψt(zt) = E[exp(βR(x0)) | zt] .
(3)
In practice we approximate this potential by exp(βRt(xt)),
where xt is decoded from the Tweedie estimate ˆz0(zt)..
Propagation.
At each diffusion timestep particles are
propagated using the reverse diffusion transition:
z(k)
t−1 ∼pθ(zt−1 | z(k)
t
),
(4)
which corresponds to one denoising update of the diffusion
model.
Weight update.
Particle weights are updated using the in-
cremental SMC importance weight:
˜w(k)
t−1 = w(k)
t
ψt−1(z(k)
t−1)
ψt(z(k)
t
)
.
(5)
Because we propose from the reverse transition itself,
qt = pθ(zt−1 | zt), the prior and proposal densities can-
cel in the twisted incremental weight, leaving only the ratio
of consecutive potentials. Using the practical reward ap-
proximation, this reduces to the following
˜w(k)
t−1 = w(k)
t
exp

βRt−1(x(k)
t−1) −βRt(x(k)
t
)

.
(6)
Weights are normalized accordingly:
w(k)
t−1 =
˜w(k)
t−1
P
j ˜w(j)
t−1
.
(7)
Resampling.
To avoid particle degeneracy we perform re-
sampling whenever the effective sample size is below a pre-
defined threshold. Particles are then resampled according to
their normalized weights. This global SMC filtering step is
applied every nsmc iterations to continuously bias the tra-
jectory population toward high-reward regions while main-
taining stochastic diversity across particles.
4.4. Local Refinement via Guided Restarts
To further improve local exploration around each trajectory
we introduce a refinement step inspired by Restarts [17, 47,
73] and particle filtering.
At selected timesteps Tref ⊆{1, . . . , T}, each particle
spawns Nr candidate latents via a short noising–denoising
cycle:
˜z(k,n)
t
= Denoise
 Noise(z(k)
t
, σt+1)

,
n = 1, . . . , Nr.
(8)
This one step restart results in a diverse set of candidates
that form a local proposal distribution around the current
particle state.
Local evaluation.
Each proposal is scored using the re-
ward ˜w(k,n)
t
∝exp
 βRt(˜x(k,n)
t
)

, where ˜x(k,n)
t
denotes
the decoded frame corresponding to ˜z(k,n)
t
. The weights
are normalized within each particle’s proposal set r(k,n)
t
=
˜
w(k,n)
t
PNr
m=1 ˜w(k,m)
t
.
Local resampling.
A refined latent state is finally selected
as follows:
z(k)
t
←˜z(k,n∗)
t
,
n∗∼Cat(r(k,1)
t
, . . . , r(k,Nr
t
)).
(9)
This allows to locally explore the latent neighborhood
while preserving high-rewards.
Since the noising–denoising cycle approximately pre-
serves the diffusion marginal at t [47, 73], resampling the
candidates ˜z(k,n)
t
according to r(k,n)
t
leaves the particle ap-
proximately distributed as pθ(· | z(k)
t+1) ψt(·), i.e. the twisted
proposal, at t ∈Tref. Refinement thus concentrates pro-
posals in high-reward regions, flattening the incremental
5


weights of Eq. (6) and reducing particle degeneracy at fixed
K. We keep the weight update unchanged, so that w(k)
t
only
reflects the selected candidate and not the quality of the lo-
cal candidate set it was drawn from [26].
For more clarity, we provide an overall algorithm de-
scription in the supplementary material.
5. Implementation Details
Our method consists of two complementary components: a
local refinement module (PF-Restart) and a global explo-
ration module based on Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC).
The local refinement step corrects camera trajectories
through restart operations combined with reward-guided re-
sampling, while the global component maintains a set of
reward-weighted trajectories that are periodically resam-
pled to preserve diversity.
For local refinement, we use the camera reward, as this
stage is specifically designed to correct the camera trajec-
tory. In contrast, the global SMC exploration relies on the
aesthetic reward. As shown in our ablations, this separation
provides a favorable trade-off between aesthetic quality and
camera accuracy.
In practice, we use Nr = 2 local candidates and K = 2
global particles, and run the diffusion model for 100 itera-
tions. To ensure reliable reward estimates, both local and
global refinement are activated starting at iteration 8. Local
refinement is applied until iteration 32, while global SMC
continues until iteration 40. Both global and local updates
are performed every 4 iterations. The local refinement step
is repeated 4 times at each iteration.
These design choices allow us to maintain the overall in-
ference time below that of NVS-SOLVER while preserving
both trajectory accuracy and visual quality.
6. Experiments
Datasets
We evaluate our method on both static and dy-
namic scenes following the experimental setting introduced
by NVS-Solver[78]. The static scenes consist of six scenes
from Tanks and Temples dataset [40] and three additional
scenes selected by [78] to cover both outdoor and indoor
environments. On the other hand dynamic scenes consist
of nine monocular videos capturing both urban and natural
settings.
Metrics
We evaluate our approach in terms of camera ac-
curacy and visual quality.
For camera accuracy, we use
Particle-SFM [88] to estimate the camera trajectory of the
generated videos and compute relative translation (RPE-T)
and rotation (RPE-R) errors [28] as well as absolute trajec-
tory error (ATE) [28]. We used FID to evaluate for visual
quality of our results.
Baselines
We compare to state-of-the-art methods includ-
ing reconstruction ones SparseGS [72], Text2NeRF [86],
Def-Gaussian [46], 4DGS [69], in addition to feedforward
methods Photo-NVS [81], 3D-aware [71], MotionCtrl [66],
NVS-Solver [78], TrajectoryCrafter [82]. Unless stated dif-
ferently, our method represents our guidance applied to
NVS-Solver [78] with Cogvideo [33] backbone at inference
time. Additional results can be found in the supplemen-
tary material.
Table 1. Quantitative comparison of different methods on NVS
from single image of static scenes. For all metrics, the lower, the
better.
Methods
Overfitting
FID
ATE
RPE-T
RPE-R
SparseGS [72]
✓
369.19
–
–
–
Text2NeRF [86]
✓
187.05
2.223
0.718
0.107
Photo-NVS [81]
×
193.87
7.64
1.19
1.45
3D-aware [71]
×
217.19
2.836
1.258
1.662
MotionCtrl [66]
×
179.24
3.851
0.705
0.835
NVS-S (DGS) [78]
×
166.50
4.533
0.810
0.742
NVS-S (Post) [78]
×
165.12
0.767
0.156
0.170
Ours
×
121.56
0.526
0.122
0.144
We evaluate the camera control in static scenes by gen-
erating novel-views from single image following prescribed
camera trajectories. A quantitative comparison is presented
in Table 1, while Figure 3 offers a visual comparison to
state-of-the-art methods. Our approach, based on reward
guidance outperforms other methods in terms of camera ac-
curacy as well as in visual quality. For camera accuracy,
our method is significantly better at preserving the global
trajectories, as evidenced by ATE errors compared to NVS-
Solver. In terms of visual quality, our method is able to gen-
erate better structures in the occluded regions, as reflected
by the FID results.
Figure 1 shows an additional visual comparison in this
setting. We illustrate cases where our strategy can improve
on top of a training-free method (NVS-Solver), as well as
a state-of-the-art training-based method (TrajectoryCrafter)
as backbone, both in synthesis quality and input camera tra-
jectory adherence.
6.1. Camera Control in Dynamic Scenes
We evaluate camera control on dynamic scenes using
monocular videos as input while enforcing prescribed cam-
era trajectories. Quantitative results are reported in Table 2,
and qualitative comparisons are shown in Figure 4.
Our reward-guided sampling strategy consistently im-
proves camera accuracy compared to existing approaches.
In particular, methods such as NVS-Solver (training-free)
and MotionCtrl (training-based) often struggle to follow the
target trajectory in the presence of scene dynamics and oc-
clusions.
In contrast, our method achieves substantially
lower Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE), as well as lower
6


Figure 3. Qualitative comparison of different methods on NVS from single image of static scenes. We compare to methods NVS-
Solver [78], NVS-Solver DGS [78], MotionCtrl [66], Text2NeRF [86].
Table 2. Quantitative comparison of different methods on NVS
from monocular videos of dynamic scenes. For all metrics, the
lower, the better.
Methods
Overfitting
FID
ATE RPE-T RPE-R
Def-Gaussian [46]
✓
115.82 1.813
0.678
0.613
4DGS [69]
✓
74.34
2.087
0.625
0.825
3D-aware [71]
×
159.03 3.100
1.343
1.368
MotionCtrl [66]
×
70.35
3.384
1.069
0.653
NVS-S (DGS) [78]
×
37.973 2.236
0.691
0.446
NVS-S (Post) [78]
×
39.86
2.308
0.725
0.400
Ours
×
31.86
0.807
0.061
0.414
relative pose errors (RPE-T and RPE-R), indicating more
accurate and faithful recovery of the desired camera motion.
Beyond trajectory accuracy, our approach also improves
the visual quality of the generated videos.
By explor-
ing multiple candidate trajectories during sampling and re-
allocating computation toward high-reward solutions, the
method better handles disocclusions and dynamic regions.
As a result, the generated videos exhibit sharper structures,
more consistent geometry, and fewer motion artifacts, lead-
ing to more realistic and temporally coherent renderings.
6.2. Ablation Studies
We conduct an ablative analysis on the static scenes from
the NVS-Solver benchmark [78] using right-sweep trajecto-
Table 3. Ablation study of our method with respect to the choice
of the backbone video model for NVS from monocular videos of
dynamic scenes. For all metrics, the lower, the better.
Methods
FID
ATE RPE-T RPE-R
NVS-S (CogVideo) [78] 41.08 0.981
0.128
0.431
Ours (CogVideo)
31.86 0.807
0.061
0.414
NVS-S (SVD) [78]
39.86 2.308
0.725
0.400
Ours (SVD)
38.26 1.912
0.521
0.489
TrajectoryCrafter [82]
29.86 0.767
0.095
0.460
Ours (TrajectoryCrafter) 30.01 0.712
0.070
0.428
ries, evaluating each component of our method using ATE,
RPE-T, RPE-R, and FID. Results are summarised in Fig-
ure 5.
Effect of restart sampling
Starting from the NVS-Solver
baseline (ATE: 1.56, RPE-T: 0.52, RPE-R: 0.27, FID:
133.96), introducing a simple restart without reward guid-
ance already yields meaningful improvements across all
metrics (ATE: 1.09, RPE-T: 0.27, RPE-R: 0.24, FID:
117.07). However, as evidenced by the wide interquartile
ranges in Figure 5, plain restart suffers from high variance
across scenes: while some scenes benefit substantially, oth-
ers show little or no improvement. This indicates that with-
7


Figure 4. Qualitative comparison of different methods on NVS from monocular videos of dynamic scenes. We compare to methods 4DGS
[69], MotionCtrl [66], NVS-Solver [78], NVS-Solver DGS [78].
out any reward signal to guide resampling, noise injection
makes the generation process unstable.
Effect of reward-guided local refinement (PF-Restart)
Incorporating reward-guided resampling into the restart
procedure (PF-Restart) significantly tightens this variance
while further improving trajectory accuracy. With Nr = 2
local candidates, PF-Restart reduces ATE to 0.76 and RPE-
T to 0.17 . Increasing to Nr = 4 pushes these to 0.54 and
0.14 respectively, while maintaining FID at 114.15 in both
settings. Compared to unguided restart, the reward-guided
resampling yields a notably more compact distribution of
per-scene errors, confirming that reward alignment stabi-
lizes the local search.
Effect of global SMC exploration
Global Sequential
Monte Carlo sampling alone (K=4) reduces ATE to 1.03
and RPE-R to 0.19, but fails to achieve satisfactory perfor-
mance on translation accuracy (RPE-T: 0.31 ) and actually
degrades FID relative to NVS-Solver (135.84 vs. 133.96).
This counterintuitive finding highlights a fundamental lim-
itation of population-level exploration without local cor-
rection: while global diversity prevents early collapse into
poor basins, it does not provide the fine-grained per-particle
guidance needed to correct individual trajectory errors. This
result confirms that global SMC alone is insufficient.
Complementarity of global and local components
Combining global SMC with local PF-Restart, our full
method achieves the best overall performance and validates
the complementarity of the two mechanisms. With K = 2
and Nr = 2, using the aesthetic reward for global explo-
ration and the camera reward for local refinement, the joint
method reaches RPE-T: 0.09 , RPE-R: 0.09, ATE: 0.37, and
FID: 103.82, which is a 6× reduction in translation error
and 4× reduction in ATE relative to NVS-Solver, while si-
multaneously improving visual quality. Increasing Nr to 4
does not monotonically help: ATE slightly degrades from
0.37 to 0.46 and RPE-R worsens from 0.09° to 0.14°, sug-
gesting that local restarting with more particle budget can
undermine global trajectory consistency when the control
signal is not strong enough. The sweet spot in our setting is
K = 2,Nr = 2.
8


(a) FID
(b) ATE
(c) RPE Translation
(d) RPE Rotation
Figure 5. Ablation results of our method on Static Scenes. We use Aesthetic reward for Global SMC and Camera reward for local
refinement. The number of local candidates is denoted as Nr while the number of global particles is referred to as K.
Effect of reward design
A crucial choice for our method
is the choice of the reward function we use to guide the
sampling. We experimented in the paper with camera er-
ror using VGGT [65] to estimate trajectories in addition
to aesthetic reward used in [36]. In our default configu-
ration, the global stage uses the aesthetic reward to preserve
visual diversity across particles, while the local stage uses
the camera reward to correct geometric drift. We addition-
ally evaluate a variant where the camera reward drives both
stages ( K = 2,Nr = 4). Replacing the aesthetic reward
with the camera reward in the global SMC yields the best
absolute ATE of 0.28: a further 24% improvement over the
aesthetic-global variant at the same Nr and also improves
RPE-R from 0.14 to 0.11 relative to the aesthetic variant.
This comes at a minor cost in visual quality (FID: 103.06
vs. 102.51) and a slight regression in RPE-R relative to the
K = 2,Nr = 2 default (0.11 vs. 0.09). These results reveal
a clear trade-off: using the camera reward globally sharp-
ens trajectory adherence but reduces the diversity of parti-
cle proposals. The default separation with aesthetic reward
globally and camera reward locally provides a good bal-
ance between geometric accuracy and visual quality, and is
the configuration adopted throughout our main experiments.
Similarly, we can see that for SCG using the camera re-
ward significantly improves the camera metrics (ATE: 1.49
vs 1.25). For PF-Restart, we noted that they both perform
equally well for scenes without large occlusion as in this
case the quality of the video is enough to guide the model to
generate meaningful content in the occluded regions. How-
ever when the motion is ambiguous due to large occlusions,
Camera reward shows significantly better results improving
the Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) from 1.00 to 0.71.
Comparison to other possible guidance methods
These
methods differ in how they estimate reward, how they sam-
ple candidate trajectories, and how they select the best sam-
ples. We seek a method that can quickly explore the space
of diffusion trajectories and accurately select the best ones.
TDS [70] and Ψ-Sampler [77] are the closest to our method
but they require differentiating through the reward function
and to backpropagate through the diffusion model which is
impractical for reward functions like the camera reward and
9


recent video diffusion models like Cog-Video or Wan. On
the other hand, SCG [35] has the advantage of maintain-
ing one global particle and sampling candidates using the
reverse SDE which results in less diverse samples through-
out the iterations. With aesthetic reward it performs the
worst of all evaluated configurations on trajectory metrics
(RPE-T: 0.71, ATE: 1.49), confirming that a non-geometric
reward is insufficient to guide camera-accurate generation
under this sampler. SCG with camera reward recovers par-
tially (RPE-T: 0.25, ATE: 1.25) but still falls far behind our
full method. Consequently, beyond the choice of the re-
ward, our approach lies in the bi-level SMC framework it-
self: global exploration and local reward-guided refinement
together achieve what neither component nor SCG can ac-
complish alone.
Backbone
Our proposed method can be applied to any
latent video diffusion model. Throughout the paper, we pri-
marily used CogVideo [33]. To evaluate the generality of
our approach, we perform an ablation study by applying our
method to SVD [7] and TrajectoryCrafter [82].
As shown in Table 3, our method consistently improves
upon NVS-Solver both in the cases where the video model
backbone is SVD and CogVideo. This result highlights the
effectiveness of our Camera Control strategy in mitigating
the weaknesses of score modulation.
On the other hand, TrajectoryCrafter, which is a fine-
tuned version of CogVideo specifically designed for cam-
era control, already achieves very competitive performance
even without additional guidance. Interestingly, when ap-
plying our method to TrajectoryCrafter, we observe further
improvements in camera accuracy while maintaining com-
parable visual quality.
6.3. Mitigating limitations of TrajectoryCrafter[82]
Training based camera controlled video generation meth-
ods can display visual artefacts, inconsistencies and mis-
alignment with the input camera trajectory, which can be
framed as generalization issues.
We show here exam-
ples where our method can help recover from such fail-
ures.
We challenge the state-of-the-art training based
method TrajectoryCrafter[82] with harder camera trajec-
tories at test time, following the camera trajectory sam-
pling in [78]. Figure 7 shows our inference-time improve-
ment over this method using some of the demo videos of
TrajectoryCrafter[82].
6.4. Mitigating limitations of ReCamMaster[3]
Training based method ReCamMaster[3] displays visual
artifacts especially under challenging camera trajectories.
Figure 6 shows our inference-time improvement over this
method.
Figure 6. Qualitative comparison in monocular video reshooting
of dynamic scenes to ReCamMaster [3].
7. Limitations
Our method can require a larger denoising budget due to
maintaining multiple candidate trajectories. Conversely, re-
ward guidance can also accelerate convergence by steering
sampling toward better solutions early.
Overall, the ap-
proach represents a reasonable trade-off when generation
quality and adherence to the control signal are prioritized.
Additionally, the effectiveness of the framework depends on
the design of the reward function, which may require task-
specific tuning.
8. Conclusion
We presented PartiCam, a training-free framework for
improving camera trajectory control in diffusion-based
video generation. Our approach combines global Sequen-
tial Monte Carlo (SMC) trajectory exploration with lo-
cal particle-filtered restarts (PF–Restart), enabling reward-
guided sampling that balances exploration and refinement
during the denoising process. This formulation mitigates
common failure modes of existing approaches, including
early trajectory drift in score-modulated sampling and lim-
ited robustness to OOD camera motions. By maintaining
a population of candidate trajectories and reallocating sam-
pling effort toward high-reward solutions, our method pro-
10


Figure 7. Qualitative comparison in monocular video reshooting
of dynamic scenes to TrajectoryCrafter [82]. We We show a two
views of the estimated camera trajectories from the videos gener-
ated with our method, TrajectoryCrafter and the Ground-truth.
duces videos that better adhere to the desired camera trajec-
tory while maintaining visual quality and temporal coher-
ence.
Beyond camera control, the proposed framework pro-
vides a general mechanism for reward-guided steering of
diffusion processes without requiring gradient backpropa-
gation or model retraining.
We believe this population-
based inference strategy may extend naturally to other con-
trolled generation tasks and forms a promising direction for
future work.
References
[1] Yuval Alaluf, Daniel Garibi, Or Patashnik, Hadar Averbuch-
Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Cross-image attention for zero-
shot appearance transfer. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 confer-
ence papers, pages 1–12, 2024. 3
[2] Sherwin Bahmani, Tianchang Shen, Jiawei Ren, Jiahui
Huang, Yifeng Jiang, Haithem Turki, Andrea Tagliasacchi,
David B. Lindell, Zan Gojcic, Sanja Fidler, Huan Ling, Jun
Gao, and Xuanchi Ren. Lyra: Generative 3d scene recon-
struction via video diffusion model self-distillation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.19296, 2025. 4
[3] Jianhong Bai, Menghan Xia, Xiao Fu, Xintao Wang, Lianrui
Mu, Jinwen Cao, Zuozhu Liu, Haoji Hu, Xiang Bai, Pengfei
Wan, and Di Zhang. ReCamMaster: Camera-controlled gen-
erative rendering from a single video.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2025. Best Paper Finalist. 10
[4] Lichen Bai, Shitong Shao, Zikai Zhou, Zipeng Qi, Zhiqiang
Xu, Haoyi Xiong, and Zeke Xie. Zigzag diffusion sampling:
Diffusion models can self-improve via self-reflection, 2024.
3, 4
[5] Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Roni Sen-
gupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
Universal guidance for diffusion models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. 3
[6] Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and
Sergey Levine.
Training diffusion models with reinforce-
ment learning.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024. 3
[7] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel
Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi,
Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, and Varun Jam-
pani. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion
models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127,
2023. 1, 2, 10
[8] Chenjie Cao, Chaohui Yu, Shang Liu, Fan Wang, Xiangyang
Xue, and Yanwei Fu.
Mvgenmaster: Scaling multi-view
generation from any image via 3d priors enhanced diffu-
sion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
6045–6056, 2025. 4
[9] David Charatan, Sizhe Lester Li, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and
Vincent Sitzmann. pixelsplat: 3d gaussian splats from image
pairs for scalable generalizable 3d reconstruction. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 19457–19467, 2024.
4
[10] Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Fuqiang Zhao, Xiaoshuai Zhang,
Fanbo Xiang, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. MVSNeRF: Fast Gen-
eralizable Radiance Field Reconstruction from Multi-View
Stereo.
In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 14104–14113. IEEE, 2021.
4
[11] Shoufa Chen, Chongjian Ge, Yuqi Zhang, et al. Goku: Flow
based video generative foundation models. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 23516–23527, 2025. 2
[12] Yuedong Chen, Haofei Xu, Chuanxia Zheng, Bohan Zhuang,
Marc Pollefeys, Andreas Geiger, Tat-Jen Cham, and Jianfei
Cai. Mvsplat: Efficient 3d gaussian splatting from sparse
multi-view images.
In European conference on computer
vision, pages 370–386. Springer, 2024. 4
[13] Hyungjin Chung,
Byeongsu Sim,
Dohoon Ryu,
and
Jong Chul Ye.
Improving Diffusion Models for Inverse
Problems Using Manifold Constraints. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 35, pages 25683–25696.
Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc.
(NeurIPS), 2022. 3
[14] Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, and Jong Chul Ye.
Come-closer-diffuse-faster: Accelerating conditional diffu-
sion models for inverse problems through stochastic contrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 3
11


[15] Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T. McCann,
Marc L. Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion posterior sam-
pling for general noisy inverse problems. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023. 3
[16] Giannis Daras, Hyungjin Chung, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Yuki Mit-
sufuji, Jong Chul Ye, Peyman Milanfar, Alexandros G. Di-
makis, and Mauricio Delbracio. A survey on diffusion mod-
els for inverse problems, 2024. 3
[17] Benjamin De Bruyne and Francesco Mori.
Resetting in
stochastic optimal control. Physical Review Research, 5(1):
013122, 2023. 5
[18] Google DeepMind.
Veo 3:
Video generation with na-
tive audio by google deepmind. https://deepmind.
google/en/models/veo/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-11-
13. 2
[19] Pierre Del Moral, Arnaud Doucet, and Ajay Jasra. Sequential
monte carlo samplers. Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety Series B: Statistical Methodology, 68(3):411–436, 2006.
3
[20] Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe
Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong Zhang. RAFT:
Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model
alignment, 2023. 3
[21] Zehao Dou and Yang Song. Diffusion posterior sampling for
linear inverse problem solving: A filtering perspective. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2024. 3
[22] Arnaud Doucet, Nando De Freitas, Neil James Gordon, et al.
Sequential Monte Carlo Methods in Practice.
Springer,
2001. 3, 4
[23] Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association, 106(496):1602–
1614, 2011. 3
[24] Noam Elata,
Bahjat Kawar,
Yaron Ostrovsky-Berman,
Miriam Farber, and Ron Sokolovsky. Novel view synthe-
sis with pixel-space diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 26756–26766, 2025. 4
[25] Ying
Fan,
Olivia
Watkins,
Yuqing
Du,
Hao
Liu,
Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel, Moham-
mad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. DPOK:
Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffu-
sion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. 3
[26] Paul Fearnhead, Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, and Gareth O.
Roberts.
Particle filters for partially observed diffusions.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 70(4):755–
777, 2008. 6
[27] Ruiqi Gao, Aleksander Hoły´nski, Philipp Henzler, Arthur
Brussee,
Ricardo Martin-Brualla,
Pratul P. Srinivasan,
Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Poole. Cat3d: Create anything
in 3d with multi-view diffusion models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024. 4
[28] Puneet Goel,
Stergios I Roumeliotis,
and Gaurav S
Sukhatme. Robust localization using relative and absolute
position estimates. In Proceedings 1999 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. Human
and Environment Friendly Robots with High Intelligence and
Emotional Quotients (Cat. No. 99CH36289), pages 1134–
1140. IEEE, 1999. 6
[29] Hao He, Yinghao Xu, Yuwei Guo, Gordon Wetzstein, Bo
Dai, Hongsheng Li, and Ceyuan Yang. Cameractrl: Enabling
camera control for text-to-video generation, 2024. 2, 3
[30] Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman,
Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-to-prompt image
editing with cross attention control. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 3
[31] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
Classifier-free diffusion
guidance. In NeurIPS Workshop on Deep Generative Models
and Downstream Applications, 2021. 3
[32] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-
fusion probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 3
[33] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and
Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video
generation via transformers.
In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2023. 1, 2, 6, 10, 15
[34] Litao Hua, Fan Liu, Jie Su, Xingyu Miao, Zizhou Ouyang,
Zeyu Wang, Runze Hu, Zhenyu Wen, Bing Zhai, Yang Long,
et al. Attention in diffusion model: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.03738, 2025. 3
[35] Yujia Huang, Adishree Ghatare, Yuanzhe Liu, Ziniu Hu,
Qinsheng Zhang, Chandramouli S Sastry, Siddharth Guru-
rani, Sageev Oore, and Yisong Yue. Symbolic music gen-
eration with non-differentiable rule guided diffusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.14285, 2024. 10
[36] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si,
Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin,
Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Limin
Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. VBench: Com-
prehensive benchmark suite for video generative models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, 2024. 9
[37] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkuehler,
and George Drettakis. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time
Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
42(4):1–14, 2023. 2, 3
[38] Jaihoon Kim, Taehoon Yoon, Jisung Hwang, and Minhyuk
Sung. Inference-time scaling for flow models via stochastic
generation and rollover budget forcing, 2025. 3
[39] Sunwoo Kim, Minkyu Kim, and Dongmin Park.
Test-
time alignment of diffusion models without reward over-
optimization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2025. 3
[40] Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen
Koltun. Tanks and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene
reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36
(4):1–13, 2017. 6
[41] Weijie Kong, Qi Tian, Zijian Zhang, Rox Min, Zuozhuo Dai,
Jin Zhou, Jia-Liang Xiong, Xin Li, Bo Wu, Jianwei Zhang,
Kathrina Wu, Qin Lin, Junkun Yuan, Yanxin Long, Aladdin
Wang, Andong Wang, Changlin Li, Duojun Huang, Fan
Yang, Hao Tan, Hongmei Wang, Jacob Song, Jiawang Bai,
12


Jianbing Wu, Jinbao Xue, Joey Wang, Kai Wang, Mengyang
Liu, Pengyuan Li, Shuai Li, Weiyan Wang, Wenqing Yu, Xi
Deng, Yang Li, Yi Chen, Yutao Cui, Yuanbo Peng, Zhen Yu,
Zhiyu He, Zhiyong Xu, Zixiang Zhou, Zunnan Xu, Yang-
Dan Tao, Qinglin Lu, Songtao Liu, Daquan Zhou, Hongfa
Wang, Yong Yang, Di Wang, Yuhong Liu, Jie Jiang, and Cae-
sar Zhong. Hunyuanvideo: A systematic framework for large
video generative models. ArXiv, abs/2412.03603, 2024. 2
[42] Juil Koo, Paul Guerrero, Chun-Hao P Huang, Duygu Ceylan,
and Minhyuk Sung. Videohandles: Editing 3d object compo-
sitions in videos using video generative priors. In Proceed-
ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con-
ference, pages 17692–17701, 2025. 3
[43] Jeong-gi Kwak, Erqun Dong, Yuhe Jin, Hanseok Ko, Shweta
Mahajan, and Kwang Moo Yi.
Vivid-1-to-3: Novel view
synthesis with video diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 6775–6785, 2024. 4
[44] Chenguo Lin, Panwang Pan, Bangbang Yang, Zeming Li,
and Yadong Mu.
Diffsplat: Repurposing image diffusion
models for scalable gaussian splat generation. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), 2025. 4
[45] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan
Li, and Jun Zhu. DPM-Solver: A fast ODE solver for diffu-
sion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
2022. 3
[46] Zhicheng Lu, Xiang Guo, Le Hui, Tianrui Chen, Min Yang,
Xiao Tang, Feng Zhu, and Yuchao Dai. 3d geometry-aware
deformable gaussian splatting for dynamic view synthesis.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 8900–8910,
2024. 3, 6, 7
[47] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher
Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting
using denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2022. 3, 4, 5
[48] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV), pages 478–495, 2020. 2, 3
[49] Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and
Daniel Cohen-Or.
Null-text inversion for editing real im-
ages using guided diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 6038–6047, 2023. 3
[50] Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian
Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan. T2I-Adapter: Learning
adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image
diffusion models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2024. 3
[51] Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li,
Tao Wang, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng,
Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, et al. Controlled decod-
ing from language models, 2023. 3
[52] Michael Niemeyer, Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall,
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Andreas Geiger, and Noha Radwan.
Regnerf: Regularizing neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis from sparse inputs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 5470–5480, 2022. 4
[53] OpenAI. Sora: Text-to-video generation by openai. https:
//openai.com/research/sora, 2024.
Accessed:
2025-11-13. 2
[54] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T.
Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-
Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz.
Hypernerf:
a higher-
dimensional representation for topologically varying neural
radiance fields. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(6), 2021. 3
[55] Meta Platforms.
Movie gen: A cast of media foundation
models for video, audio, and image generation. https:
//ai.meta.com/research/moviegen, 2024. Ac-
cessed: 2025-11-13. 2
[56] Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and
Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields
for Dynamic Scenes.
In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
10313–10322. IEEE, 2021. 3
[57] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 3
[58] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-
ing diffusion implicit models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. 3
[59] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Ab-
hishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based
generative modeling through stochastic differential equa-
tions. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), 2021. 3
[60] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bash-
lykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhos-
ale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer,
Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fer-
nandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia
Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Vik-
tor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Ko-
renev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut
Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning
Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan
Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiao-
qing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams,
Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov,
Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan
Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov,
and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models, 2023. 2
[61] Brian L. Trippe, Jason Yim, Doug Tischer, David Baker,
Tamara Broderick, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola.
Diffusion probabilistic modeling of protein backbones in 3D
13


for the motif-scaffolding problem. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 3
[62] Masatoshi Uehara, Yulai Zhao, Chenyu Wang, Xiner Li,
Aviv Regev, Sergey Levine, and Tommaso Biancalani.
Inference-time alignment in diffusion models with reward-
guided generation:
Tutorial and review.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.09685, 2025. 3, 4
[63] Vikram Voleti, Chun-Han Yao, Mark Boss, Adam Letts,
David Pankratz, Dmitrii Tochilkin, Christian Laforte, Robin
Rombach, and Varun Jampani.
SV3D: Novel multi-view
synthesis and 3D generation from a single image using la-
tent video diffusion. In European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), pages 439–457. Springer, 2024. 4
[64] Hanyang Wang, Fangfu Liu, Jiawei Chi, and Yueqi Duan.
Videoscene: Distilling video diffusion model to generate 3d
scenes in one step. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 16475–16485, 2025. 4
[65] Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea
Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotny. Vggt: Vi-
sual geometry grounded transformer, 2025. 9
[66] Zhouxia Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xintao Wang, Yaowei Li,
Tianshui Chen, Menghan Xia, Ping Luo, and Ying Shan.
Motionctrl: A unified and flexible motion controller for
video generation. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceed-
ings, 2024. 6, 7, 8, 15, 16
[67] WanTeam, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao,
Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianx-
iao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jin-
gren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao,
Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang,
Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei
Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui,
Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wenmeng
Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong
Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei
Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yitong Huang,
Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao
Hong, Yupeng Shi, and Yutong Feng. Wan: Open and ad-
vanced large-scale video generative models, 2025. 2
[68] Thadd¨aus Wiedemer, Yuxuan Li, Paul Vicol, et al. Video
models are zero-shot learners and reasoners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.20328, 2025. 2
[69] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng
Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang.
4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene render-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20310–
20320, 2024. 3, 6, 7, 8, 15, 16
[70] Luhuan Wu, Brian L. Trippe, Christian A. Naesseth,
David M. Blei, and John P. Cunningham.
Practical and
asymptotically exact conditional sampling in diffusion mod-
els, 2024. 3, 4, 9
[71] Jianfeng Xiang, Jiaolong Yang, Binbin Huang, and Xin
Tong. 3d-aware image generation using 2d diffusion mod-
els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 2383–2393, 2023.
6, 7
[72] Haolin Xiong, Sairisheek Muttukuru, Rishi Upadhyay,
Pradyumna Chari,
and Achuta Kadambi.
Sparsegs:
Real-time 360° sparse view synthesis using gaussian splat-
ting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00206, 2023. 4, 6
[73] Yilun Xu, Mingyang Deng, Xiang Cheng, Yonglong Tian,
Ziming Liu, and Tommi Jaakkola. Restart sampling for im-
proving generative processes, 2023. 2, 3, 4, 5
[74] Jiawei Yang, Marco Pavone, and Yue Wang. Freenerf: Im-
proving few-shot neural rendering with free frequency regu-
larization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 4
[75] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu
Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiao-
han Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video
diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.06072, 2024. 2
[76] Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Siyi Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-
adapter: Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-
image diffusion models. ArXiv, abs/2308.06721, 2023. 3
[77] Taehoon Yoon, Yunhong Min, Kyeongmin Yeo, and Min-
hyuk Sung.
ψ-Sampler:
Initial particle sampling for
SMC-based inference-time reward alignment in score mod-
els. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2025. arXiv:2506.01320. 3, 9
[78] Meng You, Zhiyu Zhu, Hui Liu, and Junhui Hou.
Nvs-
solver: Video diffusion model as zero-shot novel view syn-
thesizer. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), 2025. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 15, 16
[79] Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
Pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from one or few images.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 4578–4587,
2021. 4
[80] Jiwen Yu, Yinhuai Wang, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, and
Jian Zhang. FreeDoM: Training-free energy-guided condi-
tional diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
3
[81] Jason J. Yu, Fereshteh Forghani, Konstantinos G. Derpanis,
and Marcus A. Brubaker. Long-term photometric consistent
novel view synthesis with diffusion models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion (ICCV), pages 7094–7104, 2023. 6
[82] Mark Yu, Wenbo Hu, Jinbo Xing, and Ying Shan.
Tra-
jectoryCrafter: Redirecting camera trajectory for monoc-
ular videos via diffusion models.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2025. Oral. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11
[83] Sihyun Yu, Meera Hahn, Dan Kondratyuk, et al. Malt diffu-
sion: Memory-augmented latent transformers for any-length
video generation, 2025. 2
[84] Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chengpeng Li, Guanting Dong,
Keming Lu, Chuanqi Tan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou.
Scaling relationship on learning mathematical reasoning
with large language models, 2023. 2
[85] Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman.
Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. In Advances
14


Algorithm 1 SMC Diffusion with Local Guided Restarts
Require: diffusion model pθ, reward R, particles K, local
proposals Nr, refinement steps Tref, Npf repetitions of
local refinement.
1: Initialize z(k)
T
∼N(0, I), w(k)
T
= 1/K
2: for t = T, . . . , 1 do
3:
if t ∈Tref then
4:
for k = 1, . . . , Npf do
5:
for k = 1, . . . , K do
6:
Generate
˜z(k,n)
t
=
Denoise(Noise(z(k)
t
, σt+1)), n = 1 . . . Nr
7:
Score r(k,n)
t
∝exp(βRt(˜x(k,n)
t
))
8:
Sample z(k)
t
←
˜z(k,n∗)
t
,
n∗
∼
Cat(r(k,:)
t
)
9:
end for
10:
end for
11:
end if
12:
for k = 1, . . . , K do
13:
Sample z(k)
t−1 ∼pθ(zt−1 | z(k)
t
)
14:
Update ˜w(k)
t−1
←
w(k)
t
exp(βRt−1(x(k)
t−1) −
βRt(x(k)
t
))
15:
end for
16:
Normalize weights w(k)
t−1 ∝˜w(k)
t−1; resample if ESS
below threshold
17: end for
18: return {x(k)
0 }K
k=1
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 15476–
15488. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 2
[86] Jingbo Zhang, Xiaoyu Li, Ziyu Wan, Can Wang, and Jing
Liao. Text2nerf: Text-driven 3d scene generation with neural
radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11588, 2023. 6, 7
[87] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding
conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023. 3
[88] Wang Zhao, Shaohui Liu, Hengkai Guo, Wenping Wang, and
Yong-Jin Liu. Particlesfm: Exploiting dense point trajecto-
ries for localizing moving cameras in the wild. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 523–542. Springer,
2022. 6
9. Supplementary Material
10. Algorithm
Algorithm 1 summarizes our proposed method.
11. Qualitative results
We provide additional qualitative results and comparisons
in this section. Figures 8 and 9 complement Figure 4 in
the main paper. While the main paper shows only a single-
frame comparison with our method building on CogVideo
[33] based NVS-Solver [78], here we present additional
frames for each method.
Figure 8. Qualitative comparison of different methods on monoc-
ular video reshooting of dynamic scenes. We compare to meth-
ods 4DGS [69], MotionCtrl [66], NVS-Solver [78], NVS-Solver
DGS [78].
15


Figure 9. Qualitative comparison of different methods on monoc-
ular video re-shooting of dynamic scenes. We compare to meth-
ods 4DGS [69], MotionCtrl [66], NVS-Solver [78], NVS-Solver
DGS [78].
16
