Title: JacobianAvatar: Temporally Consistent Semi-rigid Avatar Reconstruction from a Monocular Video

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.31115v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:48:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# JacobianAvatar: Temporally Consistent Semi-rigid Avatar Reconstruction from a Monocular Video 

Changyeon Won 1 , Min-Gyu Park 2,3 , Seonghwan Park 2 ,Ju Hong Yoon 2,3 , and Hae-Gon Jeon 4⋆

> 1

GIST 2KETI 3polygom 4 Yonsei University 

Fig. 1: JacobianAvatar. A neural representation for digital human avatars that cap-tures rigid articulated motions and non-rigid local deformations using hierarchical neu-ral Jacobian fields, while encouraging temporal consistency with high-fidelity geometry. The top and bottom rows show the rendered color images and normal maps of an ani-mated avatar. 

Abstract. Generating realistic human avatars in complex motions—such as clothing dynamics—requires modeling of global and local deformations which remains challenging in monocular settings. We address this prob-lem by leveraging neural Jacobian fields (NJFs) for representing semi-rigid deformations. We train self-supervised neural networks for predict-ing Jacobian matrices that give the pose-dependent deformations, by solving a Poisson equation. However, monocular input presents several difficulties such as self-occluded regions and invisible surfaces. To address these issues, we introduce three key components: a constrained Poisson solver, signed distance-based Jacobian regularization, and a deformation-guided residual flow loss, which together suppress boundary artifacts, re-cover frequently occluded regions such as armpits and thighs, and enforce temporal consistency during motion. Experiments on benchmark and in-the-wild videos demonstrate that our method generates temporally sta-ble and geometrically coherent avatars, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches. 

Keywords: Avatar Reconstruction · Temporal consistency · Semi-rigid deformations  

> ⋆

Corresponding author  

> arXiv:2606.31115v1 [cs.CV] 30 Jun 2026 2C. Won et al.

## 1 Introduction 

Reconstructing photorealistic and animatable human avatars from a monocu-lar video has received a huge attention, and recent advances have significantly improved the fidelity of clothed human modeling by adopting a semi-rigid defor-mation paradigm [4,30,47]. This paradigm combines articulated skeletal motion governed by linear blend skinning (LBS) [28, 33] with non-rigid local deforma-tions to capture clothing wrinkles and pose-dependent surface details. The semi-rigid reconstruction problem naturally decomposes into two tightly coupled subproblems. The first is the recovery of a canonical model that captures the subject’s intrinsic shape and appearance in a resting state. The second is the prediction of non-rigid local deformations, such as clothing wrinkles and pose-dependent correctives [47], which is crucial for realistic rendering of an avatar in motion. The majority of the studies assume the body pose is the dominant source of causing local deformations [9, 12, 15, 17, 30, 42–44, 51]. This pose-driven approach, therefore, usually regresses local surface offsets conditioned on esti-mated human pose parameters [33]. Although these methods are effective in recovering pose-induced effects, they inherently overlook history-dependent de-formations arising from factors beyond instantaneous pose, such as cloth iner-tia, contact, or motion velocity. Time-driven methods address this limitation by incorporating temporal context, modeling deformation as a function of joint ve-locities or sequential latent codes to better capture dynamic surface behaviors. Since many approaches rely on Gaussian Splats [19] and NeRF [51] to represent a human avatar they heavily rely on the photometric reconstruction loss which does not encourage temporal consistency and geometric details, though rendered images look plausible. To alleviate this problem, several studies [4, 41] adopt 2D vision foundation models [20, 38] to improve the fidelity of geometry. From the perspective of dynamic object reconstruction [14, 31], which prior-itizes underlying geometry recovery rather than synthesizing novel view images, moving objects can be reconstructed if dense correspondences can be found be-tween consecutive frames. These correspondences can be parameterized as 6-DoF rigid transformations [14, 23], optical flow between images [45, 49], or can be im-plicitly embedded into learnable motion bases [21,46]. While effective for general dynamic scenes, these strategies remain suboptimal for avatar reconstruction be-cause of frequent self-occlusions and non-rigid deformations. In this paper, we propose neural avatar representation named as JacobianA-vatar providing semi-rigid deformations of a human body, plausible rendering, and temporal consistency, from a single monocular video. The core of JacobianA-vatar is the use of hierarchical neural Jacobian fields (NJF) [2] that encode per-triangle deformation gradients conditioned on body poses. We first train coarse Jacobian fields to learn large and global deformations, and then, find Jacobian fields capture high-frequency details subtle local deformations such as wrinkles, enabling scalable and topology-preserving animation of human body. Further-more, to effectively address the inherent ambiguities of sparse monocular obser-vations, we introduce three geometric constraints. First, we modify the standard Poisson solver of NJF by incorporating a screening term to update the neural JacobianAvatar 3

Jacobian fields from partial observations. Second, we propose a signed distance function (SDF)-based Jacobian regularizer, which preserves the global shape of the avatar by regularizing the surface normals of its canonical mesh. Finally, to enforce temporal consistency, we formulate a deformation-guided residual flow loss which minimizes the discrepancy between the projected 2D motions of our 3D vertex flows—derived from the NJF deformations—and dense 2D optical flow estimations [49]. By integrating expressive deformation modeling, effective shape constraints, and geometrically grounded temporal regularization, our approach generates fully animatable and temporally coherent avatars with fine-grained dynamic detail from limited input. We experimentally verify the performance of our method against state-of-the-art methods [9, 30, 43, 44] in geometric fidelity, deformation realism, and perceptual quality. 

## 2 Related Work 

There are many approaches to generate animatable human avatars from images or videos. One of the most popular approach is to utilize the template human models [28,34] as they give general information of articulated motion, shape, and expressions. With the aid of template human models, many studies adopt recent technologies such as neural radiance fields (NeRF), 3D Gaussian Splatting and diffusion networks, to better recover accurate and realistic avatars in motion. For making an animatable avatar, it is essential to define an avatar in the canonical space, this can be done by inverse warping reconstructed 3D models with pre-defined LBS weights of a template model. SCANimate [37] introduces a weakly supervised framework for learning pose-conditioned clothed avatar net-works from raw scans, optimizing an implicit occupancy field of a canonical model. SCALE [29] represents clothed humans as a hierarchical surface codec comprising articulated local elements, enabling decoupled modeling of body and garment dynamics. SNARF [5] proposes a differentiable forward skinning formu-lation that bridges neural implicit representations and LBS, allowing gradient-based optimization of non-rigid surface deformation. The majority of studies utilize monocular videos to capture both global and local deformations using various neural scene representations. NeuMan [17] in-troduces neural human radiance fields from monocular video with human-centric regularizers. SelfRecon [15] proposes fully self-supervised training through canon-ical pose alignment and forward-backward deformation consistency. Vid2Avatar [9] proposes a framework for learning avatars from in-the-wild monocular videos, leveraging implicit neural representation with a ray opacity sparsity regulariz-ers for robust geometric representation. CanonicalFusion [40] generates drivable 3D human avatars from multiple images via canonical space fusion, but it lim-its expressive local deformations and results in overly smooth clothing details. More recently, some works [43, 44] specifically target semi-rigid deformations. LSAvatar [43] represents the avatar through pose conditioning using graph neu-ral networks to encode locality-sensitive deformation. FacAvatar [44] decouples deformation into coarse and fine deformations by controlling the frequencies 4 C. Won et al. 

of positional encodings. However, being built on NeRF architectures, they in-evitably suffer from slow rendering and high-frequency artifacts stemming from tightly coupled geometry and texture representations. Moreover, a growing number of studies employ 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to achieve real-time rendering speeds while maintaining high visual quality for human avatars. ExAvatar [30] extends this paradigm to expressive whole-body reconstruction by anchoring 3D Gaussians to a canonical human template mesh. PERSONA [41] generalizes the framework to generated monocular videos, op-timizing identity-preserving canonical geometry from a single reference image. Vid2Avatar-Pro [10] reconstructs avatars by leveraging universal priors, achieved through the distillation of human motion and shape information from a large-scale capture dataset. GaussianAvatar [12] models dynamic clothed humans us-ing animatable 3D Gaussians, integrating forward skinning with learned pose-dependent deformation fields to capture non-rigid garment motion. Animatable Gaussians [26] learns a compact pose-conditioned Gaussian attribute map of the avatar via a lightweight convolutional neural networks, enabling the effi-cient modeling of dynamic 3DGS parameters. GomAvatar [50] and SplattingA-vatar [39] represent avatars by anchoring 3D Gaussians to a mesh, achieving real-time rendering while preserving high-frequency details of the avatar. Con-strained by the fixed topology and intrinsic rigidity of LBS, these methods may struggle to capture complex non-rigid dynamics like wrinkles and highly de-formable garments. On the other hand, diffusion models provide powerful generative priors to re-solve geometric and textural ambiguity in occluded regions. HumanGaussian [27] generates text-driven 3D clothed humans via 3D Gaussian splatting optimized using score distillation sampling (SDS) from pretrained 2D diffusion models. DreamWaltz [13] synthesizes complex animatable avatar sequences by combining diffusion-guided motion trajectory sampling with static geometry reconstruction, though dynamic deformation remains limited. PSHuman [24] integrates cross-scale multiview diffusion with SMPL-X body conditioning and explicit remeshing to enforce anatomical consistency, resolve self-occlusions, and produce water-tight, animation-ready meshes. SiTH [11] employs image-conditioned diffusion with learned skinned body priors to hallucinate photorealistic textures and nor-mal maps in unseen viewpoints. HumanRef [55] introduces reference-guided dif-fusion with spatially adaptive region-aware attention to preserve identity-specific details during texture synthesis. ReconFusion [52] regularizes sparse-view NeRF reconstruction using 3D-aware diffusion priors, enabling robust novel-view syn-thesis and geometry completion. Despite substantial progress, existing methods suffer from inherent difficul-ties. Parametric modeling is limited by template topology and LBS rigidity, fail-ing to represent complex semi-rigid deformations. We address these challenges by introducing a monocular framework that learns fine-grained local non-rigid deformations from sparse observations. Our approach integrates residual flow fields to enforce sub-pixel temporal consistency beyond photometric losses and regularizes deformation using learned neural Jacobian fields with screened Pois-JacobianAvatar 5 

> Fig. 2: Overview of our pipeline. We first initialize our canonical avatar using a human template mesh and refine it through mesh optimization. Next, we model semi-rigid deformations using two Jacobian fields integrated with a screened Poisson solver, which separately capture deformations in a coarse-to-fine manner. For appearance, we model the mesh textures as normal-conditioned colors. Finally, we incorporate 3DGS anchored to the mesh faces for a more photorealistic rendering of our avatar.

son solver that preserve local area and orientation, enabling robust, topologically flexible reconstruction of both observed and unobserved geometry from monoc-ular video. 

## 3 Proposed Method 

We present JacobianAvatar that predicts neural Jacobian fields capturing semi-rigid deformations governed by body pose. Initially, we define a canonical mesh, a human model in a T-pose or Da-pose [17], that can be animated using body pose parameters. We initialize the canonical mesh using the momentum human rigs (MHR) [8] template mesh and existing 3D generation pipelines [53, 56] can be also employed. Prior to training neural networks, we update the canonical mesh and body poses via differentiable rendering and mesh optimization [32] to reduce the gap between the avatar and the template model. Afterward, we train two neural networks that predict Jacobian fields. To this end, we suggest a constrained Poisson solver with signed distance-based regularizer and residual flow-based loss function. Finally, we train an additional network for predicting Gaussians attached to each face. Therefore, the avatar can be animated and rendered in real-time. The overall procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

Pre-processing of Canonical Mesh and Body Poses. Due to imperfections of the initial canonical mesh and body poses, we refine them by using a differen-tiable mesh renderer [22]. In this step, we jointly optimize the vertex positions 6 C. Won et al. 

and body poses across all video frames, guided by normal maps and segmen-tation masks predicted by Sapiens [20]. Formally, each vertex in the canonical mesh is transformed by LBS weights, 

V θi = LBS (V ci , θ ) = 

> K

X

> j=1

wi,j Gj (θ)V ci , (1) where V ci is the position of the i-th vertex in the canonical avatar, θ is the body pose of K joints, V θi is the deformed V ci with θ, Gj (θ) ∈ R4×4 is the bone transformation matrix of the j-th joint derived from θ, wi,j is the skinning weight of i-th vertex with respect to the j-th joint. Then, we minimize errors between rendered and predicted normal maps and masks. After the convergence, we define the updated canonical mesh as Mc, and subdivide the same mesh twice, denoted as Mf . Although we used MHR as a template model, LBS weights are adopted from SMPL-X [33] which are propagated using robust skin weight inpainting [1]. 

3.1 Semi-rigid Deformation with Neural Jacobian Fields 

Let the canonical triangle mesh obtained after the pre-processing step as M =

{V , F} , where V ∈ RN ×3 and F ∈ ZM ×3 are vertex positions and faces. Following the NJF [2], the mapping function Φ can transform V to the new positions, which is defined as 

Φ∗ = min 

> Φ

X

> ai∈F

|ai|∥∇ i(Φ) − Ji∥22, (2) where ∇i denotes the gradient operator for each face. |ai| and Ji are the area and a Jacobian matrix of ith face. Jacobian field J is a set of Jacobian matrices that deforms the canonical mesh. Given J, the optimal deformation map Φ∗ can be obtained by solving the Poisson equation [2]. Here, we add a screening term [18] to the objective function, 

Φ∗ = min 

> Φ

X

> ai∈F

|ai|∥∇ i(Φ) − Ji∥22 + λΦ∥Φ − V∥ 22

!

, (3) where λΦ is a balancing parameter. The screening term tries to keep the positions of vertices, which is required for invisible and occluded surfaces. In monocular settings, as a result, the screened Poisson behave more reliably compared to the standard Poisson. The solution to Eq. (3) can be obtained by solving the linear system, 

(L + λΦI)Φ∗ = A∇ T J + λΦV, (4) where L is cotangent Laplacian matrix, I is identity matrix, and A is the mass matrix of M. The optimal mapping function can be solved through differentiable Cholesky decomposition. In the following section, we explain how we train neural networks to predict optimal Jacobian fields. JacobianAvatar 7

3.2 Self-supervised Training of Neural Jacobian Fields 

We train five MLP networks, ψc, ψf , ψb, ψr , ψg that predict coarse and fine Jacobian fields, colors, and remaining Gaussian properties. First of all, ψc and 

ψf are trained to capture both coarse and fine deformations from a video obser-vation. ψc predicts a Jacobian matrix for each face at coarse level, 

zci = Ec(xci ), J ci = ψc(zci , θ ), (5) where Ec(xci ) extracts a spatial latent code from a tri-plane, and θ is the body pose parameters. In this step, ψc is trained w.r.t. the coarse mesh Mc. Afterward, we train ψf to capture fine details, 

zfi = Ef (xfj ), J fi = ψf (zfi + zci , θ ). (6) Here, the network structure is same as the coarse MLP but the coarse feature 

zci is added to the output of Ef (xfj ). Since we train ψf for a subdivided mesh 

Mf with the aid of coarse latent features, this network capture both coarse and fine deformations. For training the appearance of an avatar, we train two MLP networks, 

cbi = ψb(zi), cri = ψr (zi, ni), ci = cbi + cri , (7) where ψb and ψr are shallow MLP networks to predict isotropic and anisotropic components of colors. We adopt this idea from ExAvatar [30], instead of us-ing spherical harmonics. Finally, the last network ψg predicts scale and offset parameters of Gaussians attached to each face. Since our representation is a hybrid of mesh and 3DGS, we use both mesh renderer Rmesh and a GS rasterizer Rgs . We first update the geometry and color with Rmesh ,

ˆIt, ˆNt, ˆAt = Rmesh (LBS (Φθt (M), θ t), P t), (8) where the mesh rasterizer renders an image ˆIt, a normal map ˆNt, and a fore-ground mask ˆAt of a posed mesh. The mapping functions Φθ can be calculated by solving Eq. (4) that gives a deformed mesh. Here, t indicates the time stamp for the body pose θt and camera projection matrix Pt because we handle a video sequence. The rendered outputs are compared to self-supervision signals using Sapiens [20]. We train ( ψc, Ec), ( ψf , Ef ), and ( ψb, ψr ) sequentially. Afterward, we use Rgs to update Gaussians to recover high-fidelity appearance. We define a set of 3D Gaussians G as 

Gi = {μi, δ μi, si, qi, o i, ci}, (9) where μi is the face center after deformation, i.e ., Φθ (xi), δμi is an offset vector, 

si is scale, qi is quaternion, oi is opacity, and cri is the face color calculated in Eq (7). We predict an offset and a scale as, 

δμi, si = ψG (zi, θ ) (10) 8 C. Won et al. 

where ψG is an MLP network and zi is from Eq. (6). Finally, the network is updated by minimizing the input image with the rendered image, 

ˆIt = Rgs (LBS (G, θ t), P t), (11) where LBS (·) warps 3D Gaussians to the body pose of tth frame. 

3.3 Training Objectives 

We propose two total loss functions for the mesh renderer and GS renderer. The first loss function is defined as, 

Lmesh =λL1 LL1 (ˆIt, It) + λlpips Llpips (ˆIt, It) + λssim Lssim (ˆIt, It)+ λmask Lmask ( ˆAt, At) + λnormal Lnormal ( ˆNt, Nt)+ λresidual Lresidual (It, It−1, Wt) + λSDF LSDF (Φθt (M)) + λreg Lreg (Jθt ) + λlap V Llap (Φθt (V), F)+ λCb Ldual-lap (Cb, F) + λCLdual-lap (C, F)

(12) where LL1 , Llpips , and Lssim compute L1, perceptual, and structural similarity losses between input and rendered images. Lnormal is a normal cosine similarity loss with a pseudo ground truth normal map from a pretrained model [20]. Lmask 

is an L1 loss between a rendered foreground mask and a pseudo ground truth mask from a pretrained model [20]. Lreg is an L1 regularizer on the pose de-pendent deformation maps derived from the Jcθt and Jfθt by solving the screened Poisson equation (4). Llap is a Laplacian regularizer and Ldual-lap is a dual Lapla-cian regularizer. For color, we regularize for both anisotropic and combined col-ors, Cb and C. Note that this loss function is applied to coarse and fine meshes in a sequential manner. The second loss function is defined as, 

Lgs = λL1 LL1 (ˆIt, It) + λlpips Llpips (ˆIt, It) + λssim Lssim (ˆIt, It)+ λscale Lscale (s) + λoffset Loffset (δμ) + λlap sLlap (s)+ λlap δμLlap (δμ) + λresidual Lresidual ,(It, It−1, Wt)

(13) where Lscale and Loffset are L2 regularizers on scale s and offsets δμ, respectively. For temporal consistency, we adapt the residual flow loss on 3D Gaussians. We obtain a 2D flow map Wt by assigning a displacement vector as an attribute to each 3D Gaussian and rendering the flow map using alpha-blending. Here, we propose Lresidual and LSDF loss functions to the fidelity and temporal consistency of an avatar, which we explain in detail in the following sections. 

Deformation-guided Residual Flow. We claim that relying on per-frame ob-servations is insufficient to capture fine-grained local deformations. Therefore, we propose a temporal consistency regularizer to capture temporal changes. First, we select two frames, e.g ., at time t and t − 1, and determine the difference of projected Vi at different time steps. Then, the projected point can be denoted, 

uti = π(LBS (Φθt (Vi), θ t), P t), (14) JacobianAvatar 9

where vertex Vi is deformed by the predicted mapping function Φθt followed by the LBS function, and π is a projection function with the camera projection matrix Pt. Then, we further define a 2D displacement vector, 

δuti = uti − ut−1 

> i

, (15) which is the displacement of Vi in pixels. Here, we assign δuti as the vertex attribute; therefore, it gives a 2D flow map between the two frames. We define this as Wt as the 2D flow map between images. Instead of comparing Wt to the optical flow between the two frames, we find a residual flow by using a pre-trained optical flow network F [48], 

∆Wt = F(It, It−1, Wt). (16) where I is a ground truth image. Here, F search correspondence given initial displacement map Wt, therefore, predicted residual ∆Wt becomes zero if Wt

is perfect. To this end, we minimize the residual flow, 

Lresidual = || ∆Wt|| 1, (17) to further constrain the temporal consistency between two frames. 

Signed distance-based Jacobian regularization. Sparse observations and self-occluded regions of the avatar frequently generate unwanted deformations, such as severe mesh stretching and flipped faces. To address this, we propose a SDF-based regularizer to maintain the global shape of the canonical avatar. To achieve this, we set a voxel grid containing the discrete SDF values of the initial coarse mesh Mc. Then, we compute the spatial gradients of signed distance values at the deformed vertices and faces, and set approximate normals as flipped spatial gradients [36]. Surface normals of the initial mesh by calculating the spatial gradients within the SDF voxel grid. Using these derived normals as a geometric prior, we regu-larize the face and vertex normals of the deformed canonical avatar via a cosine similarity loss, 

LSDF = λface 

X

> ai∈F

(1 − ˆnai · nSDF (xi)) + λvertex 

X 

> vj∈V

 1 − ˆnvj · nSDF (vj ) , (18) where xi is the center of the i-th face of the mesh, and nai and nvj denote the face and vertex normal vectors of the deformed canonical avatar, respectively. Furthermore, ˆnSDF (x) is the normal extracted from the SDF voxel grid by nor-malizing the spatial gradient of the SDF volume at position x. Through these geometric priors, the Jacobian matrices evolve to neighboring iso-surfaces rather than abruptly changing positions. 

## 4 Experimental Results 

4.1 Implementation details 

We initialize our mesh using the MHR [8] template at Level of Detail (LoD) 3. For the screened Poisson solver, we empirically set λΦ to 5 and 1 for the coarse and 10 C. Won et al. 

fine meshes, respectively. The tri-plane resolutions are set to 64 for Ec and 128 for Ef . Each plane has a feature dimension of 32, and we concatenate the features extracted from all three planes. For stable training, following NJF [2], we also initialize the last layer of both MLPs, ψc and ψf , with zero weights and biases. We train our avatar on a single RTX 6000 Ada GPU. Including preprocessing, the training process takes about 10 hours, depending on the video length. 

4.2 Datasets 

We evaluate our method on four public datasets, which include diverse identities, poses, and environments. 

MonoPerfCap dataset [54]. The MonoPerfCap dataset is captured in in-the-wild environments, including indoors and outdoors, and contains natural human poses. It is recorded under stable lighting conditions, and subjects typically wear non-loose clothing, making it ideal for evaluating the reconstruction of semi-rigid deformations. This dataset also provides high frame rate videos, yielding temporally dense and continuous motion. Following Vid2Avatar-Pro [10], we split the dataset into training and testing sets, comprising the first 80% of frames and the remaining frames, respectively. This split allows us to evaluate generalization performance to novel views. 

SynWild dataset [9]. The SynWild dataset is a synthetic dataset that provides ground-truth meshes, enabling the quantitative evaluation of geometric accuracy. It contains clothing deformations, making it particularly suitable for assessing semi-rigid deformations. Since this dataset lacks camera parameters, we apply Iterative Closest Point (ICP) registration to align reconstructed avatars with the ground-truth meshes, following the evaluation protocol of the previous work [9]. 

NeuMan dataset [17]. The NeuMan dataset consists of outdoor videos includ-ing subjects performing repetitive motions. Compared to MonoPerfCap dataset, the motions are simple and limited, and cloth deformation is less. Besides, the humans move relatively longer distance than other datasets, leading to lighting variations depending on the position. We follow the official data split, which utilize interval views for testing, making it suitable for evaluating novel view interpolation performance. 

DNA-Rendering dataset [6] The DNA-Rendering dataset is captured in a multi-view studio with various types of clothing. It contains sequences featuring loose garments with challenging non-rigid deformations. By randomly sampling a single camera per frame, we adapt this dataset to a monocular setting. Using this setup, we evaluate novel view synthesis performance and qualitatively compare mesh reconstruction results with state-of-the-art (SOTA) SDF-based methods. 

4.3 Comparisons to State-of-the-art Methods Comparison methods. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our representa-tion, we compare our method against five methods that achieve SOTA results in geometric accuracy and rendering quality. Vid2Avatar [9], LSAvatar [43] and Fa-cAvatar [44] represent the canonical avatar using a SDF, an approach known for JacobianAvatar 11 

its robustness in capturing geometric details. ExAvatar [30] and GoMAvatar [50] utilizes 3DGS to produce photorealistic rendering results and achieves robust-ness in novel pose and novel view synthesis by applying a Laplacian regularizer that is computed using the connectivity of the mesh of the canonical avatar. 

Evaluation Protocol. We quantitatively compare our method with SOTA methods. To assess rendering quality, we measure PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS ( ×100 ). In this evaluation, except for DNA-Rendering dataset, we follow a protocol of previous works, which additionally optimizes the body poses for the test set using rendering losses. This evaluation protocol reduces the dependency of the metrics on the accuracy of the body pose. To evaluate geometric accuracy, we measure the Chamfer Distance (CD) ( ×1000 ), Normal Error (NE) and the F1-score at thresholds of 1 cm and 2 cm against the ground-truth meshes. For Normal Er-ror, we render the normals of both the ground-truth and aligned meshes from four orthogonal views (front, back, left, and right), and then measure the cosine similarity in overlapping regions. 

Table 1: Quantitative comparison of rendering quality on the MonoPerfCap, DNA-Rendering, and NeuMan datasets.                                                              

> Dataset Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> (a) MonoPerfCap GoMAvatar [50] 28.35 0.975 1.95 Vid2Avatar [9] 28.74 0.977 2.06 LSAvatar [43] 27.96 0.975 2.15 FacAvatar [44] 28.06 0.975 1.99 ExAvatar [30] 30.47 0.980 2.00
> Ours 31.83 0.978 1.67 (b) DNA-Rendering Vid2Avatar [9] 29.46 0.972 2.88 LSAvatar [43] 27.94 0.968 2.37 ExAvatar [30] 28.54 0.970 2.85
> Ours 29.90 0.971 2.19 (c) NeuMan HumanNeRF [51] 27.06 0.967 1.92 InstantAvatar [16] 28.47 0.972 2.77 NeuMan [17] 25.48 0.966 2.87 Vid2Avatar [9] 26.87 0.969 2.41 3DGS-Avatar [35] 29.75 0.975 1.75 GaussianAvatar [12] 29.94 0.980 1.24
> ExAvatar [30] 29.37 0.980 1.87
> Ours 29.75 0.974 1.94

Quantitative results. As shown in Tab. 1 (a), our method outperforms the comparison methods in view extrapolation on the MonoPerfCap dataset. This is attributable to our hybrid mesh-3DGS representation, which provides coher-ent geometry and high-fidelity appearance in unseen views. Furthermore, the high frame rate of this dataset is beneficial for our deformation guided residual 12 C. Won et al.                                       

> Table 2: Quantitative comparison of geometry accuracy on the SynWild dataset.
> Method Type CD ↓NE ↓F1@1cm ↑F1@2cm ↑
> GoMAvatar [50] Explicit 9.30 0.140 0.276 0.544 ExAvatar [30] Explicit 9.39 –0.307 0.515 Vid2Avatar [9] Implicit 2.59 0.091 0.346 0.647 LSAvatar [43] Implicit 2.55 0.095 0.343 0.646 FacAvatar [44] Implicit 2.91 0.106 0.329 0.623
> Ours Explicit 2.46 0.091 0.397 0.681

flow loss Lresidual , which in turn contributes to the improved overall rendering performance. For the DNA-Rendering dataset, we evaluate novel view synthesis results for avatars with loose clothing in Tab. 1 (b). Our pipeline effectively reconstructs these avatars by first optimizing the global shape via an initial mesh optimiza-tion step, and subsequently utilizing the network to recover fine-level geometry. Providing more accurate geometry compared to baselines, our method achieves the best rendering quality. In Tab. 1 (c), we achieve results comparable to SOTA methods on the Neu-Man dataset, despite the severe lighting changes in the scenes, which do not explicitly consider. The results for all baseline methods with the exception of ExAvatar, are directly borrowed from previous work [10]. We evaluated ExA-vatar using the pretrained weights provided with the author’s reimplementa-tion, without rendering the background to ensure a fair comparison with these baselines. As shown in Tab. 2, our explicit approach compares favorably against recent implicit methods, achieving the state-of-the-art performance in modeling semi-rigid deformations. Unlike implicit models that struggle to guarantee temporal consistency, we directly deform the mesh via NJF, constraining this explicit deformation through a deformation-guided residual loss. Furthermore, implicit represent may suffer from artifacts during mesh extraction, which limits their ability to preserve high-frequency geometric details. 

Qualitative results. We provide qualitative comparisons from both perspec-tives: geometry and rendering quality of the avatar. In Fig. 3, we compare ren-dered normal maps using the Synwild dataset. As shown in the first row, our method recovers the sharp wrinkles in the pants and the T-shirt, with the aid of neural Jacobian fields. More importantly, we observed texture-copying artifact, where 2D textures are incorrectly baked into the 3D geometry when a human wears highly textured cloth (as shown in the bottom row). This indicates ge-ometry and texture are entangled in the existing approach. In our case, we in-dependently capture semi-rigid deformations without optimizing texture-related variables, which alleviated this phenomenon. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4, our method produces cleaner meshes on the DNA-Rendering dataset, Specifically, the proposed pipeline is free from the JacobianAvatar 13 Ground Trut h Ours  LSAvatar  Vid2Avatar  FacAvatar 

Fig. 3: Qualitative comparison of rendered normal maps. Compared methods [9, 43, 44] suffer from texture-copying artifacts on the geometry, whereas our method shows smooth surfaces in the textured regions. Ours  Vid2Avatar  LSAvatar GT Image  Ours  Vid2Avatar  LSAvatar  Ours  Vid2Avatar  LSAvatar GT Image  Ours  Vid2Avatar  LSAvatar 

Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison of mesh reconstruction with SDF-based methods [9,43] on the DNA-Rendering dataset. Ground Truth  Ours  LSAvatar  Vid2Avatar  FacAvatar ExAvatar  GoMAvatar 

Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison of rendering quality with state-of-the-art methods [9, 30, 43, 44, 50] on the MonoperfCap Dataset. 

extraction artifacts inherently caused by the Marching Cubes algorithm, which is essential for mesh reconstruction in previous SDF-based approaches. In Fig. 5, we qualitatively compare rendered images. When the face is seen from the side view, most existing methods show blurry textures, whereas our method shows relatively clean results. This implicitly confirms that the geome-try is more accurate compared to SOTA methods. Secondly, in the highlighted pants region, we can observe the proposed method shows sharp and accurate tex-tures. We believe the Jacobian fields are good at capturing local deformations, therefore, attached 3DGS also shows sharp and clean results. 14 C. Won et al. Ground Truth  w/o Coarse -to -Fine Strategy  Ours  Ground Truth  w/o Screened Poisson solve r Ours       

> w/o ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙 Ours Ground Truth w/o ℒ𝑆𝐷𝐹 Ours Ground Truth

Fig. 6: Ablation study on the Synwild dataset. We visualize the effects of each compo-nent of our proposed method on the geometry quality by removing them independently. 

Table 3: Ablation studies on the 00000_random scene of the SynWild dataset. We assess geometry quality by removing each component of our method. 

Method CD( ×1000) ↓ NE ↓

w/o LSDF 3.51 0.113 w/o Lresidual 3.01 0.106 w/o Screened Poisson solver 3.28 0.106 w/o Coarse-to-fine Strategy 2.96 0.107 

Ours 3.01 0.102 

4.4 Ablation study 

We analyze the impact of each component of our method qualitatively in Fig. 6 and quantitatively in Tab. 3. 

Coarse-to-fine Strategy. Optimizing the fine Jacobian field without coarse Jacobian field introduces high-frequency, noisy deformations on the mesh. As shown in the figure, it also fails to capture prominent wrinkles compared to our full model. Therefore, in the table, it performs well in CD, which is relatively insensitive to small surface noise, but performs poorly in NE where these noisy deformations are penalized. 

Screened Poisson solver. Relying solely on the Poisson solver without our for-mulation causes large stretching artifacts due to the limited observations from monocular videos. However, regularizing the solver using the initial mesh effec-tively prevents these artifacts. As these large artifacts result in severe geometric distortions, they cause a degradation in the CD. 

Deformation-guided Residual Flow Loss ( Lresidual ). This loss is not only helpful for capturing temporal consistency but also plays a crucial role in sup-pressing artifacts in heavily self-occluded areas like the armpits. Specifically, it mitigates these artifacts by regularizing the noisy flow predictions generated by JacobianAvatar 15 

pretrained models. However, these self-occluded regions occupy only a small por-tion of the overall body, removing this loss results in remaining a similar CD. However, the resulting local artifacts degrade the surface quality, leading to poor performance in NE. 

Signed Distance-based Jacobian Regularization ( LSDF ). This term reg-ularizes the global shape of the avatar, effectively preventing artifacts in regions with sparse observations. Consequently, without this regularization, the woman’s back, which is a rarely visible area in the video, suffers from severe noisy defor-mations as shown in the figure. Moreover, omitting this loss makes the model susceptible to overfitting to specific viewpoints, leading to an overall degradation in mesh quality. As a result, the absence of this regularizer causes a performance drop in both CD and NE. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We have proposed a robust framework for generating drivable, semi-rigid avatars from monocular video. By integrating Neural Jacobian Fields (NJF) with a screened Poisson solver, and introducing a deformation-guided residual flow with SDF-based regularization, our method captures semi-rigid deformations while preventing geometric artifacts. We demonstrate effectiveness of our work through comparisons with the-state-of-the-art methods on various scenes. 

Limitations and Future Work. Our method struggles to reconstruct avatars with loose-fitting clothing. However, since it relies on the LBS weights from the template model, i.e ., a naked body, loose clothes that behave differently from the inner body cannot be modeled. Next, our current model does not encompass facial expressions. We leave these extensions as future work, where existing facial reconstruction method can be integrated into our framework. 

Acknowledgement This work was supported by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grants funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.RS-2024-00398830, RS-2020-II201361 and No.RS-2025-25441838) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2024-00338439). 

## References    

> 1. Abdrashitov, R., Raichstat, K., Monsen, J., Hill, D.: Robust skin weights transfer via weight inpainting. In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Technical Communications. SA ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2023). https: //doi.org/10.1145/3610543.3626180 ,https://doi.org/10.1145/3610543. 3626180
> 2. Aigerman, N., Gupta, K., Kim, V.G., Chaudhuri, S., Saito, J., Groueix, T.: Neural jacobian fields: learning intrinsic mappings of arbitrary meshes. ACM TOG 41 (4) (2022) 3. Alldieck, T., Magnor, M., Xu, W., Theobalt, C., Pons-Moll, G.: Detailed human avatars from monocular video. In: 2018 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). pp. 98–109. IEEE (2018)

16 C. Won et al. 4. Chen, H., Peng, B., Tao, Y., Zhang, J.: Dˆ 3-human: Dynamic disentangled digital human from monocular video. In: CVPR (2025) 5. Chen, X., Zheng, Y., Black, M.J., Hilliges, O., Geiger, A.: SNARF: Differentiable forward skinning for animating non-rigid neural implicit shapes. In: ICCV (2021) 6. Cheng, W., Chen, R., Fan, S., Yin, W., Chen, K., Cai, Z., Wang, J., Gao, Y., Yu, Z., Lin, Z., et al.: Dna-rendering: A diverse neural actor repository for high-fidelity human-centric rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 19982–19993 (2023) 7. Feng, Y., Yang, J., Pollefeys, M., Black, M.J., Bolkart, T.: Capturing and animation of body and clothing from monocular video. In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers. pp. 1–9 (2022) 8. Ferguson, A., Osman, A.A.A., Bescos, B., Stoll, C., Twigg, C., Lassner, C., Otte, D., Vignola, E., Prada, F., Bogo, F., Santesteban, I., Romero, J., Zarate, J., Lee, J., Park, J., Yang, J., Doublestein, J., Venkateshan, K., Kitani, K., Kavan, L., Farra, M.D., Hu, M., Cioffi, M., Fabris, M., Ranieri, M., Modarres, M., Kadlecek, P., Khirodkar, R., Abdrashitov, R., Prévost, R., Rajbhandari, R., Mallet, R., Pearsall, R., Kao, S., Kumar, S., Parrish, S., Yu, S.I., Saito, S., Shiratori, T., Wang, T.L., Tung, T., Xu, Y., Dong, Y., Chen, Y., Xu, Y., Ye, Y., Jiang, Z.: Mhr: Momentum human rig (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.15586 

9. Guo, C., Jiang, T., Chen, X., Song, J., Hilliges, O.: Vid2avatar: 3d avatar re-construction from videos in the wild via self-supervised scene decomposition. In: CVPR (2023) 10. Guo, C., Li, J., Kant, Y., Sheikh, Y., Saito, S., Cao, C.: Vid2avatar-pro: Authentic avatar from videos in the wild via universal prior. In: CVPR (June 2025) 11. Ho, I., Song, J., Hilliges, O.: Sith: Single-view textured human reconstruction with image-conditioned diffusion. In: CVPR (2024) 12. Hu, L., Zhang, H., Zhang, Y., Zhou, B., Liu, B., Zhang, S., Nie, L.: GaussianAvatar: Towards realistic human avatar modeling from a single video via animatable 3D gaussians. In: CVPR (2024) 13. Huang, Y., Wang, J., Zeng, A., Cao, H., Qi, X., Shi, Y., Zha, Z.J., Zhang, L.: DreamWaltz: Make a scene with complex 3D animatable avatars. In: NeurIPS (2023) 14. Jafarian, Y., Park, H.S.: Learning high fidelity depths of dressed humans by watch-ing social media dance videos. In: CVPR (2021) 15. Jiang, B., Hong, Y., Bao, H., Zhang, J.: SelfRecon: Self reconstruction your digital avatar from monocular video. In: CVPR (2022) 16. Jiang, T., Chen, X., Song, J., Hilliges, O.: Instantavatar: Learning avatars from monocular video in 60 seconds. In: CVPR (2023) 17. Jiang, W., Yi, K.M., Samei, G., Tuzel, O., Ranjan, A.: NeuMan: Neural human radiance field from a single video. In: ECCV (2022) 18. Kazhdan, M., Hoppe, H.: Screened poisson surface reconstruction. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics (ToG) 32 (3), 1–13 (2013) 19. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM TOG 42 (4) (2023) 20. Khirodkar, R., Bagautdinov, T., Martinez, J., Zhaoen, S., James, A., Selednik, P., Anderson, S., Saito, S.: Sapiens: Foundation for human vision models. In: ECCV (2024) 21. Kratimenos, A., Lei, J., Daniilidis, K.: Dynmf: Neural motion factorization for real-time dynamic view synthesis with 3d gaussian splatting. In: ECCV (2024) 22. Laine, S., Hellsten, J., Karras, T., Seol, Y., Lehtinen, J., Aila, T.: Modular primi-tives for high-performance differentiable rendering. ACM TOG 39 (6) (2020) JacobianAvatar 17 23. Lei, J., Weng, Y., Harley, A.W., Guibas, L., Daniilidis, K.: Mosca: Dynamic gaus-sian fusion from casual videos via 4d motion scaffolds. In: CVPR (2025) 24. Li, P., Zheng, W., Liu, Y., Yu, T., Li, Y., Qi, X., Chi, X., Xia, S., Cao, Y.P., Xue, W., Luo, W., Guo, Y.: Pshuman: Photorealistic single-image 3d human recon-struction using cross-scale multiview diffusion and explicit remeshing. In: CVPR (2025) 25. Li, R., Yang, S., Ross, D.A., Kanazawa, A.: Ai choreographer: Music conditioned 3d dance generation with aist++. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 13401–13412 (2021) 26. Li, Z., Zheng, Z., Wang, L., Liu, Y.: Animatable gaussians: Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps for high-fidelity human avatar modeling. In: CVPR (2024) 27. Liu, X., Zhan, X., Tang, J., Shan, Y., Zeng, G., Lin, D., Liu, X., Liu, Z.: Human-Gaussian: Text-driven 3D human generation with gaussian splatting. In: CVPR (2024) 28. Loper, M., Mahmood, N., Romero, J., Pons-Moll, G., Black, M.J.: SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM TOG 34 (6) (Oct 2015) 29. Ma, Q., Saito, S., Yang, J., Tang, S., Black, M.J.: SCALE: Modeling clothed hu-mans with a surface codec of articulated local elements. In: CVPR (2021) 30. Moon, G., Shiratori, T., Saito, S.: Expressive whole-body 3d gaussian avatar. In: ECCV (2024) 31. Newcombe, R.A., Fox, D., Seitz, S.M.: Dynamicfusion: Reconstruction and tracking of non-rigid scenes in real-time. In: CVPR (June 2015) 32. Nicolet, B., Jacobson, A., Jakob, W.: Large steps in inverse rendering of geometry. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40 (6), 1–13 (2021) 33. Pavlakos, G., Choutas, V., Ghorbani, N., Bolkart, T., Osman, A.A.A., Tzionas, D., Black, M.J.: Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In: CVPR (2019) 34. Pavlakos, G., Choutas, V., Ghorbani, N., Bolkart, T., Osman, A.A.A., Tzionas, D., Black, M.J.: Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face, and body from a single image. In: CVPR (2019) 35. Qian, Z., Wang, S., Mihajlovic, M., Geiger, A., Tang, S.: 3dgs-avatar: Animatable avatars via deformable 3d gaussian splatting. In: CVPR (2024) 36. Remelli, E., Lukoianov, A., Richter, S., Guillard, B., Bagautdinov, T., Baque, P., Fua, P.: Meshsdf: Differentiable iso-surface extraction. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems 33 , 22468–22478 (2020) 37. Saito, S., Yang, J., Ma, Q., Black, M.J.: SCANimate: Weakly supervised learning of skinned clothed avatar networks. In: CVPR (2021) 38. Saleh, F., Aliakbarian, S., Hewitt, C., Petikam, L., Xiao, X., Criminisi, A., Cash-man, T.J., Baltrusaitis, T.: David: Data-efficient and accurate vision models from synthetic data. In: ICCV (2025) 39. Shao, Z., Wang, Z., Li, Z., Wang, D., Lin, X., Zhang, Y., Fan, M., Wang, Z.: Splattingavatar: Realistic real-time human avatars with mesh-embedded gaussian splatting. In: CVPR (2024) 40. Shin, J., Lee, J., Lee, S., Park, M.G., Kang, J.M., Yoon, J.H., Jeon, H.G.: Canoni-calFusion: Generating drivable 3D human avatars from multiple images. In: ECCV (2024) 41. Sim, G., Moon, G.: PERSONA: Personalized whole-body 3D avatar with pose-driven deformations from a single image. In: ICCV (2025) 42. Song, C., Wandt, B., Rhodin, H.: Pose modulated avatars from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11951 (2023) 18 C. Won et al. 43. Song, C., Wu, Z., Su, S.Y., Wandt, B., Sigal, L., Rhodin, H.: Locality sensitive avatars from video. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations (2025) 44. Song, C., Wu, Z., Wandt, B., Sigal, L., Rhodin, H.: Representing animatable avatar via factorized neural fields. In: Computer Graphics Forum. vol. 44, p. e70192. Wiley Online Library (2025) 45. Teed, Z., Deng, J.: Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In: ECCV. Springer (2020) 46. Wang, Q., Ye, V., Gao, H., Zeng, W., Austin, J., Li, Z., Kanazawa, A.: Shape of motion: 4d reconstruction from a single video. In: ICCV (2025) 47. Wang, S., Simon, T., Santesteban, I., Bagautdinov, T., Li, J., Agrawal, V., Prada, F., Yu, S.I., Nalbone, P., Gramlich, M., Lubachersky, R., Wu, C., Romero, J., Saragih, J., Zollhoefer, M., Geiger, A., Tang, S., Saito, S.: Relightable full-body gaussian codec avatars. ACM TOG 2501.14726 (2025) 48. Wang, Y., Deng, J.: Waft: Warping-alone field transforms for optical flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21526 (2025) 49. Wang, Y., Lipson, L., Deng, J.: Sea-raft: Simple, efficient, accurate raft for optical flow. In: ECCV. Springer (2024) 50. Wen, J., Zhao, X., Ren, Z., Schwing, A.G., Wang, S.: Gomavatar: Efficient animat-able human modeling from monocular video using gaussians-on-mesh. In: CVPR (2024) 51. Weng, C.Y., Curless, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Barron, J.T., Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I.: HumanNeRF: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video. In: CVPR (2022) 52. Wu, R., Mildenhall, B., Henzler, P., Park, K., Gao, R., Watson, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Verbin, D., Barron, J.T., Poole, B., Hoyński, A.: Reconfusion: 3d reconstruction with diffusion priors. In: CVPR (2024) 53. Xiang, J., Lv, Z., Xu, S., Deng, Y., Wang, R., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Tong, X., Yang, J.: Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506 (2024) 54. Xu, W., Chatterjee, A., Zollhöfer, M., Rhodin, H., Mehta, D., Seidel, H.P., Theobalt, C.: Monoperfcap: Human performance capture from monocular video. ACM TOG 37 (2) (2018) 55. Zhang, J., Li, X., Zhang, Q., Cao, Y., Shan, Y., Liao, J.: Humanref: Single image to 3d human generation via reference-guided diffusion. In: CVPR (2024) 56. Zhao, Z., Lai, Z., Lin, Q., Zhao, Y., Liu, H., Yang, S., Feng, Y., Yang, M., Zhang, S., Yang, X., et al.: Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffusion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12202 (2025) 57. Zhou, Y., Barnes, C., Lu, J., Yang, J., Li, H.: On the continuity of rotation rep-resentations in neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 5745–5753 (2019) JacobianAvatar 19 

# Supplementary Material 

## A Demonstration of Avatar Animation 

We provide a supplementary video showcasing the animation capabilities of our method. To generate realistic movements, we utilize SMPL body poses sampled from the AIST++ Dance Motion Dataset [25]. In addition to the supplementary video, we visualize the rendering results of the animated avatar, including both RGB images and normal maps in Fig. A1. Furthermore, to demonstrate the gen-eralization of our pipeline, we present animation results on the PeopleSnapshot dataset [3], as shown in the supplementary video and Fig. A2. In these figures, our reconstructed avatars exhibit plausible geometry and stable rendering qual-ity. 

## B Demonstration of Avatars in Loose Clothing 

As mentioned in the Conclusion section of the main paper, reconstructing avatars in loose clothing is out of the scope of our work. However, the coarse-to-fine manner of our pipeline can provide reasonable reconstruction quality even for such challenging cases. To demonstrate this capability, we reconstruct an avatar on a video sequence from SCARF [7], as shown in the Fig. A3. Here, our method successfully reconstructs the avatar and captures some non-rigid deformations, such as the dynamics of the dress. Furthermore, the reconstructed avatar shows stable animation results under unseen poses. 

## C Demonstration of pose driven semi-rigid deformation 

To capture realistic body dynamics, we formulate the semi-rigid deformation as a pose-dependent function. As shown in Fig. C4, we visualize these deformations on the canonical avatar to illustrate how they respond to varying body poses. For instance, when the right arm is raised (left panel), the resulting semi-rigid deformation naturally mimics the tension in the avatar’s clothing. 

## D Additional Qualitative Results 

In Fig. D5, we provide additional qualitative comparisons on the test sets of NeuMan [17] and MonoPerfCap [54] datasets. Specifically, we compare our ap-proach against ExAvatar and Vid2Avatar, which demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in the main paper. For a fair comparison on the NeuMan dataset, we utilize the results provided on their GitHub repositories. As shown in the fig-ure, our pipeline reconstructs more realistic wrinkles compared to these baseline methods. 20 C. Won et al.  

> Fig. A1: Animation results of our reconstructed avatars on the NeuMan, MonoPerf-Cap, and SynWild datasets.

## E Implementation Details 

E.1 Details for Network of Jacobian fields 

In the original Neural Jacobian Fields (NJF), a single MLP predicts a 9-channel output that is directly reshaped into a 3 × 3 Jacobian matrix. However, this direct representation may introduce high non-linearity into the output matrix, making the optimization process more challenging. To alleviate this, we employ three separate 3-layer MLPs to independently predict the scale, shear, and ro-JacobianAvatar 21 

Fig. A2: Animation results of our reconstructed avatars on the PeopleSnapshot dataset. time 𝑡 𝑎      

> Canonical Avatar
> time 𝑡 b
> Avatar Animation
> First Frame Non -rigid Deformation
> time 𝑡 𝑎 time 𝑡 b

Fig. A3: Reconstruction results of an avatar in loose clothing. Our pipeline achieves visually plausible results, even though it is primarily designed for semi-rigid deforma-tions. 

tation matrices, and then obtain the final Jacobian field by multiplying these components together. Specifically, the first MLP outputs a 6D continuous rotation representa-tion [57], which is mapped to a 3 × 3 rotation matrix. The second and third MLPs estimate a 3D scale vector and a 3D shear vector, respectively. These scale and shear values are explicitly assigned to the diagonal and upper off-diagonal elements of an upper triangular matrix. Finally, we obtain the full Jacobian field by multiplying the rotation matrix with this upper triangular matrix. 22 C. Won et al. Body   

> Pose
> Posed
> Avatar
> Canonical Avatar
> with semi -rigid deformation s
> Body
> Pose
> Posed
> Avatar
> Canonical Avatar
> with semi -rigid deformation s

Fig. C4: Visual demonstration of semi-rigid deformations driven by body poses of the avatars. Ground Truth  Ours  ExAvatar  Vid2Avatar 

Fig. D5: Additional qualitative comparisons with ExAvatar and Vid2Avatar on the MonoPerfCap and NeuMan datasets. 

E.2 Hyperparameters 

In our framework, we employ various loss functions to optimize the avatar. The hyperparameters used across the different stages (Coarse, Fine, and GS) are detailed in Tab. E1. JacobianAvatar 23 

Table E1: Hyperparameters for our loss functions. We report the loss weights applied during the Coarse, Fine, and GS optimization stages. 

Loss Term Symbol Coarse Fine GS 

RGB L1 Loss λL1 10 .0 10 .0 10 .0

LPIPS Loss λlpips 2.0 2.0 2.0

SSIM Loss λssim 2.0 2.0 2.0

Deformation-guided Residual Flow Loss λresidual 10 .0 20 .0 20 .0

L1 Regularization for Mesh Deformation λreg 1.0 1.0 -SDF-based Jacobian Regularization λSDF 1.0 0.1 -Dual Laplacian Regularization for C λC 1.0 0.1 -Dual Laplacian Regularization for Cb λCb 1.0 0.1 -Laplacian Regularization for V λlap V 5,000 30 ,000 -L2 Regularization for s λscale - - 10 .0

L2 Regularization for δμ λoffset - - 1.0

Dual Laplacian Regularization for s λlap s - - 5,000 

Dual Laplacian Regularization for δμ λlap δμ - - 10 .0