Title: IAM: Identity-Aware Human Motion and Shape Joint Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25164v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 00:26:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# IAM : Identity-Aware Human Motion and Shape Joint Generation 

Wenqi Jia 1,2, Zekun Li 2,3, Abhay Mittal 2, Chengcheng Tang 2, Chuan Guo 2,Lezi Wang 2, James Matthew Rehg 1, Lingling Tao 2, and Sizhe An 2

> 1

UIUC 2Meta Reality Labs 3Brown University 

Fig. 1: Identity-Consistent Motion Generation. Our framework enables decou-pled control of action dynamics and subject morphology. Given identity cues and mo-tion prompts, the model synthesizes diverse body shapes while producing motions that remain physically consistent with body morphology. 

Abstract. Recent advances in text-driven human motion generation en-able models to synthesize realistic motion sequences from natural lan-guage descriptions. However, most existing approaches assume identity-neutral motion and generate movements using a canonical body repre-sentation, ignoring the strong influence of body morphology on motion dynamics. In practice, attributes such as body proportions, mass distri-bution, and age significantly affect how actions are performed, and ne-glecting this coupling often leads to physically inconsistent motions. We propose an identity-aware motion generation framework that explicitly models the relationship between body morphology and motion dynamics. Instead of relying on explicit geometric measurements, identity is repre-sented using multimodal signals, including natural language descriptions and visual cues. We further introduce a joint motion–shape generation paradigm that simultaneously synthesizes motion sequences and body shape parameters, allowing identity cues to directly modulate motion dynamics. Extensive experiments on motion capture datasets and large-scale in-the-wild videos demonstrate improved motion realism and mo-tion–identity consistency while maintaining high motion quality. Project Page: https://vjwq.github.io/IAM.       

> arXiv:2604.25164v1 [cs.CV] 28 Apr 2026 2Jia et al.
> Keywords: Human Motion Generation ·Body Shape ·Multimodal

## 1 Introduction 

Human motion generation from natural language has made rapid progress in re-cent years, enabling models to synthesize diverse and realistic action sequences from textual descriptions [6,9,13,18,31,36,39]. Recent advances in diffusion mod-els, transformer architectures, and discrete motion tokenization have significantly improved motion quality and semantic alignment, making text-to-motion gener-ation a promising paradigm for character animation [41], digital avatars [14, 43], and embodied simulation [35, 37]. Despite these advances, most existing approaches share an implicit assump-tion: motion dynamics are universal and independent of the person performing them. In practice, however, human motion is inseparable from the physical iden-tity of the body that produces it. Attributes including height, limb proportions, and mass distribution directly modulate how movements are executed. For ex-ample, two individuals performing the same “jogging” instruction exhibit dis-tinct stride lengths, joint trajectories, and temporal dynamics dictated by their specific musculoskeletal constraints. These morphological factors shape coordi-nation patterns, forming characteristic motion signatures intrinsically tied to an individual’s physical identity [15]. Nevertheless, most existing human motion generation models represent move-ment using a canonical, standardized skeleton and body shape template [20,23]. Under this paradigm, identity attributes are either ignored during synthesis or introduced post-hoc through retargeting [32,42] or skeleton rescaling [10]. While computationally convenient, this decoupled design treats identity as a super-ficial visual attribute rather than a fundamental structural prior that governs motion dynamics. Consequently, generated motions often reflect “averaged” dy-namics. When transferred to characters with diverse body shapes, these generic trajectories may lead to visual artifacts or unnatural coordination, hindering the deployment in downstream tasks that demand high individual fidelity, such as personalized avatar animation [28, 40] and physically-informed embodied simu-lation [17, 38]. Recent works have begun exploring shape-conditioned motion synthesis by incorporating body morphology into the generation process [19,32]. For instance, Shape My Moves [19] utilizes explicit anthropometric measurements alongside motion prompts. However, such approaches typically rely on precise numerical descriptors that are difficult for average users to provide. More fundamentally, these methods treat body morphology merely as an external conditioning signal, leaving the underlying motion engine identity-agnostic. This formulation fails to capture the intrinsic coupling between form and function; the model learns to “warp” a universal motion to fit a shape, rather than learning how a specific body type inherently moves. In this work, we propose an Identity-Aware Motion Generation framework that explicitly models the interdependence between body morphology and mo-IAM 3

tion dynamics. Instead of relying on rigid geometric measurements, we represent human identity through multimodal signals, including natural language descrip-tions and visual observations. Textual descriptions convey high-level semantic attributes (e.g., “a tall, athletic male”), while images provide fine-grained struc-tural cues such as proportions and mass distribution that are difficult to articu-late in prose. To achieve morphologically grounded synthesis, we introduce a joint motion– shape generation paradigm . By modeling the joint distribution of motion se-quences and body parameters, identity cues directly inform the generation pro-cess rather than acting as a post-hoc constraint. This approach ensures that synthesized trajectories are inherently consistent with the character’s physi-cal frame. Our framework is model-agnostic and can be integrated into both diffusion-based and token-based architectures. We evaluate our framework using motion capture data and large-scale in-the-wild videos, supported by a scalable pipeline that extracts motion, shape, and multimodal identity annotations. Ex-perimental results demonstrate that explicitly modeling identity-motion interde-pendence significantly improves morphological consistency and motion realism while maintaining high generation quality, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

– Joint Motion–Shape Paradigm: We propose IAM , a novel framework that learns the joint distribution of motion and body morphology, ensuring synthesized dynamics are inherently grounded in physical identity. 

– Multimodal Identity Prior: We leverage synergistic text and visual cues as identity priors, providing a flexible interface that captures holistic body attributes from natural language and images without relying on manual ge-ometric descriptors. 

– Universal Compatibility and Efficacy: We demonstrate our identity-aware design is model-agnostic across discrete and continuous backbones. Notably, IAM significantly boosts motion quality (FID) and identity consis-tency ( β Dist.) on diffusion architectures, achieving state-of-the-art results. 

## 2 Related Works 

2.1 Text-to-Motion Synthesis 

Text-to-motion (T2M) synthesis [2, 3, 9, 12, 34, 36, 44, 45] aims to generate hu-man motion sequences from natural language descriptions, typically represented in high-dimensional pose parameterizations such as 263-dim [10] or 272-dim for-mats [6,18,21,36]. Recent approaches have explored different generative paradigms. Diffusion-based methods [3, 31, 44] achieve strong motion quality and diversity through iterative denoising. Transformer-based methods, such as MoMask [9], leverage masked modeling to improve temporal coherence. Concurrently, token-based autoregressive models, including T2M-GPT [39] and Motion-GPT [13], discretize motion into token sequences, enabling long-range dependency model-ing via language modeling techniques. Despite these advances, most T2M meth-4 Jia et al. 

ods assume a fixed canonical body representation and generate motion indepen-dent of subject identity or morphology. As a result, the influence of individual body proportions, age, or gender on motion dynamics is largely ignored, limiting the realism and identity consistency of synthesized motions. 

2.2 Human Shape-Conditioned Motion Synthesis 

Recent works begin to explore incorporating identity or body shape into motion generation [1, 16, 19, 32, 33]. Shape My Moves [19] models body shape jointly with motion, but relies on accurate numerical conditioning, limiting flexibility and robustness in identity transfer. HUMOS [32] improves identity controllabil-ity through identity-aware conditioning; however, it focuses primarily on mo-tion retargeting and does not enable joint synthesis of motion and shape from text. Other works focus on stylized motion generation. SMooDi [46] and LoRA-MDM [26] enable stylistic control over generated motion by conditioning on expressive attributes. However, these approaches primarily model stylistic varia-tions rather than physical morphology. Consequently, the effects of intrinsic body attributes, such as body shape, gender, or age, remain entangled with stylistic factors. In contrast, our work explicitly models body shape-aware condition-ing and enables joint synthesis of identity-consistent body shape and physically plausible motion directly from text. 

## 3 Method 

We aim to synthesize identity-consistent human motion from textual motion descriptions under multimodal identity conditioning while preserving semantic plausibility and structural realism. Fig. 2 illustrates the overview architecture of the motion and shape joint generation framework. We present the task formu-lation (Sec. 3.1), data processing pipeline (Sec. 3.2), multimodal identity con-ditioning mechanism (Sec. 3.3), and joint motion–shape generation paradigm (Sec. 3.4). 

3.1 Task Formulation 

Formally, we define the motion prompt as a natural language description of the action, denoted as Tm, and the identity condition as a multi-modal representation consisting of a semantic identity description Ti and an optional visual prior Ii.Together, the identity condition is represented as Ci = {Ti, I i}. Given the motion prompt Tm and identity condition Ci, the objective is to generate: (1) a motion sequence M = {x1, x 2, . . . , x L}, where each frame xt ∈ R272 represents the pose and motion features at time t [36], and (2) the corresponding body shape parameters β ∈ R10 , describing the subject’s morphology. IAM 5     

> Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed framework. (a) Data Processing Pipeline :We extract motion sequences M, shape parameters β, and multimodal identity de-scriptions ( Ti, I i) from diverse sources including in-the-wild videos and MoCap data. (b) Motion-Shape Generation : A multimodal identity conditioning framework in-tegrates textual and visual priors through frozen encoders to jointly generate identity-consistent motion sequences and body shapes via a diffusion model.

3.2 Identity Representation 

We represent human identity using two complementary modalities: text-based se-mantic descriptions and image-based structural priors. We consider two datasets with different annotation settings: the HumanML3D benchmark with ground-truth SMPL parameters and our large-scale in-the-wild IdentityMotion dataset with multimodal annotations, described in section 4. We employ GVHMR [27] to reconstruct pseudo ground-truth motion sequences M and SMPL-X body shape parameters β for the in-the-wild videos, which serve as supervision signals. 

Text-based Identity Representation. We define the semantic identity Ti as a natural language description focusing on the subject’s physique and morpho-logical attributes. We employ two distinct pipelines to ensure Ti is grounded in body shape reality: 

– Knowledge-based Synthesis: For the HumanML3D benchmark, we re-trieve the ground-truth body shape parameters β ∈ R10 from the source AMASS collection [22]. These numerical parameters are mapped to anatom-ical keywords via the Body Talk framework [29]. We then utilize Llama 3.2 [8] to refine these keywords into fluent, natural body descriptions. 

– VLM-based Annotation: For our large-scale in-the-wild dataset Identity-Motion , we leverage Gemini 2.5 Pro [5] to perform multimodal annotation. Following [7], we carefully design structured prompts to decouple motion dynamics Tm from identity attributes Ti, yielding consistent and descriptive identity tokens for over 200k sequences. We further employ Llama 3.2 [8] to rewrite Tm, ensuring that it contains no identity-related information. 6 Jia et al. 

Image-based Identity Representation To provide precise structural and appearance guidance, we complement textual descriptions with visual priors Ii.This modality captures fine-grained structural cues like limb proportions and torso-to-leg ratios, which is often elude concise textual description. 

– Synthesized Priors: Since the original video data for HumanML3D is unavailable, we reconstruct identity references by rendering SMPL meshes. Specifically, we utilize retrieved β parameters to generate shaded images in a canonical front-view, providing a normalized geometric reference for identity conditioning. 

– Authentic Priors: For our IdentityMotion dataset, we leverage the high-fidelity visual information inherent in the source videos. We extract a repre-sentative keyframe from each sequence to serve as the identity reference Ii.These real-world images provide authentic appearance priors, capturing nu-anced physical characteristics and surface details that significantly enhance the diversity and realism of the identity-conditioned generation. 

3.3 Multimodal Identity Conditioning Mechanism 

We design a multimodal conditioning mechanism that integrates motion prompts 

Tm with identity conditions Ci = {Ti, I i}. As shown in Fig. 2 (b), the condition-ing signals and strategy are described as follows. 

Textual Encoding. We employ a frozen text encoder to extract semantic em-beddings from the motion description Tm and the identity description Ti. These textual inputs are encoded into a latent representation Etxt ∈ RL×dtxt , where L

denotes the sequence length and dtxt = 768 . A learnable projection layer is sub-sequently applied to map these embeddings into the hidden dimension d = 512 .

Visual Encoding. For the visual prior Ii, a frozen image encoder extracts a 512-dimensional feature vector, capturing identity-related attributes such as age, gen-der, and body morphology, as well as fine-grained structural cues like limb pro-portions. This image feature is projected into a visual embedding Eimg ∈ R1×d

to maintain dimensional consistency with the textual features. 

Fusion Strategy. We adopt a late fusion strategy by treating the visual and textual priors as distinct tokens within a unified condition sequence. Specifi-cally, the final conditional representation C is constructed by concatenating the projected textual tokens and the visual token along the sequence dimension: 

C = [ Etxt ; Eimg ] ∈ R(L+1) ×d. To support classifier-free guidance [11], we include a joint dropout mechanism during training, where both textual and visual em-beddings are replaced by a learnable null token with a probability of 10%. This enables the model to effectively navigate between conditional and unconditional score estimates during the inference stage. 

3.4 Joint Motion-Shape Generative Paradigms 

Our framework is model-agnostic and can be integrated into various generative architectures to perform joint synthesis of motion sequences M and body shape IAM 7

parameters β ∈ R10 . The core principle is to reformulate the standard motion generation task into a joint density estimation problem p(M, β |C i), ensuring the generated dynamics are inherently grounded in the synthesized morphology. 

Diffusion-based Paradigm. Building upon [30], we adapt the denoising net-work to predict the joint distribution of xt (pose) and β (shape), as illustrated in Fig. 2. Instead of treating motion and body shape as decoupled tasks, we propose a unified joint representation by augmenting the motion feature space. Specifi-cally, we concatenate the 10-dimensional shape parameters β to the motion rep-resentation x ∈ R272 at each frame, forming a joint state vector z = [ x; β] ∈ R282 .The denoising network ϵθ is then trained to reconstruct this joint manifold from Gaussian noise, guided by the multimodal identity condition Ci. The training objective is defined as a holistic Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss over the joint space: 

Ljoint = Et,z 0,ϵ 

∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t, Ci)∥2 (1) This formulation forces the model to capture the intrinsic correlations between temporal dynamics and static morphology. By backpropagating through a single unified loss, the diffusion process naturally learns to maintain identity consis-tency throughout the generated sequence. 

VQ-based Paradigm. For the VQ-based paradigm, we adapt the MoMask framework by incorporating an auxiliary body shape prediction head into the generative Transformer. While the motion is discretized into tokens through a frozen residual vector quantizer (RVQ), the Transformer is tasked with learning the joint distribution of these discrete tokens and the continuous shape param-eters β. Specifically, the Transformer output is bifurcated into a classification head for motion tokens and a regression head for body shape. Given the identity condition Ci, the model predicts both the token logits and the shape parameters 

ˆβ. The total training objective is formulated as a multi-task loss: 

LV Q = Lce + γ∥β − ˆβ∥2 (2) where Lce is the cross-entropy loss for masked token prediction, and the second term is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) for shape regression. The hyperparameter 

γ was set to 0.1, serves as a balancing coefficient to align the gradients of the discrete and continuous optimization targets. Notably, we keep the original RVQ frozen to leverage its high-quality motion priors while enabling identity-specific morphological generation. 

## 4 Experiments 

We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate three key aspects: (1) motion gen-eration quality, (2) identity–shape consistency, and (3) generalization to unseen identities. Our evaluation examines motion quality, text alignment, body-shape 8 Jia et al.  

> Fig. 3: Overview of IdentityMotion Dataset. Left: Distribution of identity and motion attributes, including body type, age, gender, and motion category. Right: Word cloud of identity descriptions, highlighting common appearance attributes.

reconstruction accuracy, and generalization to unseen identities. Comprehensive quantitative (Sec. 4.5) and qualitative results (Sec. 4.6) demonstrate the effec-tiveness of the proposed paradigm. 

4.1 Datasets HumanML3D. We conduct evaluations on HumanML3D, which contains 14,616 motions and 44,970 text descriptions. To enable identity-aware generation, we augment this dataset with ground-truth SMPL shape parameters β ∈ R10 re-trieved from the AMASS [22] collection. The augmented dataset covers 449 unique identities, including 263 males and 186 females, with a diverse body type distribution of 116 slim, 269 average, and 64 heavyset individuals. As detailed in Sec. 3.2, body shapes are converted into natural language identity descriptions and synthesized structural priors to serve as multi-modal conditioning signals. We use the standard split to evaluate the model’s performance in joint motion-shape synthesis. 

IdentityMotion. To improve identity diversity during training, we further cu-rate a large-scale in-the-wild corpus containing over 200k motion sequences via a VLM-based pipeline. Unlike the synthesized priors in HumanML3D, IdentityMo-tion provides authentic appearance priors extracted directly from source videos, capturing nuanced human characteristics. The dataset features a balanced dis-tribution across various attributes, including body type (52% slim, 41% average, 7% heavyset), gender (64% female, 36% male), and age (see Fig. 3). We use Iden-tityMotion for both training and evaluation, and assess zero-shot generalization by testing on subjects strictly disjoint from those seen during training. IAM 9

4.2 Implementation Details 

Our model is built upon a Transformer-based architecture with 8 layers, 4 at-tention heads, and a latent dimension of 256. We follow [30] to use a frozen DistilBERT [25] as text encoder, and have a frozen CLIP [24] as image feature encoder. We train our model on HumanML3D for 400k steps using 2 NVIDIA H100 GPUs with a batch size of 64 per GPU and a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4.For IdentityMotion, we train for 200k steps using 4 NVIDIA H100 GPUs with a batch size of 256 per GPU and a learning rate of 2 × 10 −4. All experiments use the AdamW optimizer with GELU activations. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics Text-to-Motion. We follow standard T2M protocols [10], reporting Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) ↓, R-Precision (R@k, k ∈ { 1, 2, 3}) ↑, Multi-Modal Distance (MM-D) ↓, and Diversity (Div) ↑ to evaluate motion quality, text align-ment, and motion variation. 

Shape Metrics. We evaluate body shape accuracy in both parameter and ge-ometry space. Following [4], we report Body Measurement error ↓ (Height, Chest, Waist, Hips) alongside SMPL/SMPL-X β parameter reconstruction ( β-Dist ↓). For HumanML3D and IdentityMotion, we utilize the first 10 dimensions of SMPL and SMPL-X β respectively to maintain a consistent scale. For geometric fidelity, we report V2V error ↓ and P2P 20 k error ↓ (20K sampled surface points). Note that β-Dist for "Real motion" denotes the average L2 distance between individ-ual ground-truth β and the dataset mean, reflecting inherent shape variance. 

4.4 Baselines 

We train and evaluate our diffusion-based model and the VQ-based baseline on HumanML3D. For IdentityMotion, we evaluate the diffusion-based model on held-out identities to assess zero-shot identity generalization, and provide a qualitative comparison with [19]. Detailed quantitative and visual results are presented in 4.5 and 4.6. 

Diffusion-Based Model. We train an improved version of MDM [30] under different conditioning configurations, including identity-neutral motion prompts, identity-aware motion prompts, and image features, denoted as •, •, and •,respectively. This setup allows us to systematically analyze the contribution of each modality to body shape accuracy and motion fidelity. 

VQ-Based Model. We adapt the MoMask [9] framework by incorporating an auxiliary body shape prediction head into the generative Transformer. The original RVQ codebook is kept frozen, and only the Transformer is trained to model the joint distribution of motion sequences and body identities. 

Shape My Moves [19] employs templated numeric body measurements for identity-aware motion generation. As its training code and optimization pipeline are not publicly released, we do not retrain the model and instead provide a qualitative comparison on the HumanML3D and IdentityMotion test sets. 10 Jia et al.                                                                                        

> Table 1: Quantitative Results on HumanML3D. Our model supports joint mo-tion and body shape generation under multiple conditioning signals, including:
> •Identity-neutral motion prompts, •Identity-aware motion prompts, •Image features. Colored dots in the Cond. column indicate the inputs used by each method. Methods Cond. βGen. Text-to-Motion Metrics βDist.
> ↓
> FID ↓R@1 ↑R@2 ↑R@3 ↑MM-D ↓Div →
> Real motion ––0.002 0.702 0.864 0.914 15.151 27.492 3.270 VQ Based •✗10.952 0.625 0.801 0.871 15.690 27.261 /VQ Based •✓11.34 0.585 0.765 0.838 16.425 27.562 1.359 Diffusion Based •✗13.207 0.701 0.831 0.882 15.285 27.292 /Diffusion Based •✓7.395 0.659 0.820 0.884 15.537 27.133 1.190 Diffusion Based •• ✓7.371 0.642 0.812 0.873 15.685 27.142 0.647
> Diffusion Based •• ✓7.774 0.640 0.812 0.871 15.806 27.121 0.711

4.5 Quantitative Results Performance on HumanML3D. Table 1 summarizes the performance on the HumanML3D dataset. Compared to the VQ-based baseline, the diffusion-based variants consistently achieve superior results in both motion quality (FID) and body shape accuracy ( β Dist.). Specifically, our diffusion model conditioned on both identity-aware prompts and image features ( •• ) achieves an FID of 7.371 

and the lowest β Dist. of 0.647 . This demonstrates that the diffusion framework better captures the complex joint distribution of dynamic motions and static body structures. 

Effect of Conditioning Signals. The results in Table 1 and Table 3 highlight the importance of multi-modal identity conditioning. While models using only identity-neutral prompts ( •) fail to generate diverse body shapes, the inclusion of identity-aware text ( •) significantly reduces the β Dist.. The best performance is reached by incorporating image features ( •), which provide fine-grained ge-ometric priors. As shown in Table 3, the variant with dual conditioning ( •• )on the HumanML3D dataset reaches a reconstruction accuracy comparable to ShapeMyMoves, with a height error of only 5.8 mm. 

Paradigm Insights. While our framework is inherently model-agnostic, the performance gains vary across generative paradigms. In particular, the improve-ments are more pronounced for diffusion-based models, likely due to their stronger capacity for modeling complex joint distributions of motion dynamics and body geometry. In contrast, while capable of synthesizing accurate human shape, VQ-based models introduces a mild trade-off in motion quality after inject-ing identity-aware constraints, suggesting that diffusion architectures are better suited for jointly modeling identity and motion. 

Generalization on IdentityMotion. To evaluate the generalization capabili-ties on unseen subjects, we retrain and test the diffusion-based variants on the IdentityMotion dataset. As shown in Table 2, despite the challenges of a zero-shot setting with unseen identities, our model maintains competitive motion IAM 11                                                                                                       

> Table 2: Zero-shot Quantitative Results on IdentityMotion. We retrain and evaluate the diffusion-based variants on the IdentityMotion dataset. The results are reported on a test set with unseen identities from the training set to evaluate shape-motion generation capability. Methods Cond. βGen. Text-to-Motion Metrics βDist.
> ↓
> FID ↓R@1 ↑R@2 ↑R@3 ↑MM-D ↓Div →
> Real motion ––0.002 0.565 0.822 0.916 0.750 30.2919 2.972 Diffusion Based •✗31.799 0.629 0.847 0.927 0.781 29.718 /Diffusion Based •✓28.667 0.641 0.857 0.935 0.754 29.879 1.452 Diffusion Based •• ✓31.726 0.606 0.834 0.918 0.778 29.866 1.392 Diffusion Based •• ✓23.174 0.609 0.836 0.926 0.771 30.032 1.279 Table 3: Body Shape Reconstruction Accuracy in mm. Our diffusion-based model reaches comparable performance with ShapeMyMoves. Method Cond. Dataset Height Chest Waist Hips V2V P2P 20 k
> ShapeMyMoves –HumanML3D 5.8 6.9 10.6 6.0 //Diffusion Based •HumanML3D 18.8 16.9 23.7 16.7 7.9 7.0 Diffusion Based •• HumanML3D 5.8 8.6 12.6 6.8 3.0 2.8 Diffusion Based •• IdentityMotion 53.5 67.9 77.3 32.1 17.6 19.1

fidelity. Notably, the dual-conditioned model ( •• ) achieves both the lowest FID score of 23.174 and shape preservation with a β Dist. of 1.279 , significantly outperforming the single-condition variants. This validates that our model does not merely memorize training identities but learns to map multi-modal identity descriptors to the underlying human body shape space. Furthermore, the su-perior performance of the dual-conditioned model suggests that, in large-scale real-world settings with diverse human identities, capturing realistic motion dy-namics requires combining complementary identity cues from both textual de-scriptions and visual appearance. This contrasts with smaller-scale datasets such as HumanML3D, where the limited diversity of performers makes single modal-ity largely sufficient for identity conditioning. The shape reconstruction accuracy reported in Table 3 is comparable to the state-of-the-art shape estimation per-formance of Shapy [4] on unseen images. This indicates that our model achieves a physically plausible shape estimation range while uniquely supporting the ad-ditional task of identity-aware motion generation. 

4.6 Qualitative Results Qualitative Results on HumanML3D. We first provide a visual comparison on the HumanML3D test set to evaluate the motion-shape generation capabilities of different frameworks in Fig. 4. Both our VQ-based and Diffusion-based mod-els ( •• ) directly synthesize body shape and motion sequences from the provided 12 Jia et al. 

prompts. For the Shape My Moves baseline, which requires templated numeric measurements not present in the standard dataset, we use ground-truth β val-ues to retrieve the corresponding numeric template parameters. These retrieved values and action prompts are then fed into their pre-trained checkpoint to gen-erate the results. Visualizations of per-vertex body shape deviation demonstrate that our diffusion-based model better preserves the target identity shape while maintaining motion consistency. While Shape My Moves can generate seman-tically plausible motions, the generated sequences tend to exhibit less accurate body-shape preservation and weaker fine-grained motion details. “a person throws something with their right hand hard” “a male with a lean, athletic build” 

“a person jumps and spin in the air” “a female with a short, average build” 

“a person goes into a short jog before stopping” “a male with a lean, average build” 

“a person kicks with the left foot” “a female with a slim build. She is tall, with long torso and legs” 

Diffusion Based Method VQ Based Method Shape My Moves 

> * Small spatial offset
> added to avoid occlusion
> * Small spatial offset
> added to avoid occlusion
> * Small spatial offset
> added to avoid occlusion

Fig. 4: Qualitative Comparison on the HumanML3D Test Set. Given the same action prompt and identity description, different methods generate motion sequences conditioned on the same inputs. The colored meshes visualize the per-vertex body shape deviation from the target identity shape, where the color bar indicates the error range (0–50 mm). Diffusion-Based method better preserves the specified body shape while maintaining motion consistency with the action prompt. 

Zero-shot Generalization on Unseen Set. To assess the robustness of our model in real-world scenarios, we conduct zero-shot evaluations using the Iden-tityMotion test set, which contains identities strictly disjoint from the train-ing data. Using our dual-conditioned diffusion model ( •• ), we generate motions based on reference images, motion prompts, and identity descriptions. As illus-trated in Fig. 5, the model successfully synthesizes motions for a wide range IAM 13 

of challenging identities. Despite the increased error range compared to Hu-manML3D test set, our method maintains strong motion-prompt adherence while preserving the target identity shape, whereas Shape My Moves frequently fails to follow the motion prompts. “A young adult female with a slim, athletic build. She has dark hair tied back in a ponytail” 

> "A person walks at a
> medium pace across a
> vast, flat, snow -covered
> frozen lake on an
> overcast day."
> “A person sits on a
> bicycle and pedals
> forward, their legs
> moving in a continuous,
> alternating circular
> motion as they hold the
> handlebars and ride
> along a path.”
> “A person stands
> holding a long -handled
> rake. They push the rake
> forward into a smoking
> pile on the ground, then
> pull it back, spreading
> the ashes. They repeat
> this motion.”

“An older adult male with a stocky build, bald on top with hair on the sides.” 

> “A person jogs
> forward.”

“A young adult female with a plus -size, heavy build.” 

"An older adult male with a white beard, of average height and build. He is wearing heavy winter clothing, 

including a parka, snow pants, a hat, and gloves, and is carrying a large backpack." 

Diffusion Based Method Shape My Moves 

Fig. 5: Qualitative Results of Zero-shot Generalization on Unseen Test Set. 

Each row shows an example consisting of a reference image, a motion prompt, and an identity description. The colored meshes visualize the per-vertex body shape deviation from the target identity shape, where the color bar indicates the error magnitude in millimeters (0–100 mm). Our diffusion-based method better preserves the specified body shape while generating motions consistent with the action prompt. 

Identity-Controllable Motion Generation. Finally, we evaluate whether the model can disentangle identity and motion by performing identity-controllable generation with randomly composed identity–motion prompts. Specifically, iden-tity descriptions and motion prompts from the IdentityMotion dataset are ran-domly paired to form previously unseen combinations. In this setting, we utilize the dual-conditioned model ( •• ) but zero-pad the image feature input, as refer-ence images are not available for these identity–motion pairs. Fig. 6 demonstrates that the model can successfully apply a single action prompt across a diverse spectrum of identities, ranging from “slender” to “large, overweight” builds. The 14 Jia et al. “A young adult                

> male with slender
> build.”
> “A muscular adult
> male with a well -
> defined upper body,
> including
> prominent pectoral,
> shoulder, and arm
> muscles. ”
> “A young adult
> female with
> slender build.”
> “An older adult
> female with white
> hair, of average
> height and a heavy -
> set build.”
> “An older adult
> male with a large,
> overweight build.”
> “A person performs a
> cheerful dance on a white
> background, swaying their
> hips and moving their
> arms.”
> “A person hesitantly walks
> across a wobbly rope
> bridge at an outdoor
> adventure park, holding
> onto the overhead safety
> harness for balance.”
> “A person walks forward
> holding bricks with both
> hands.”

Fig. 6: Zero-shot Identity-Controllable Motion Generation. Columns corre-spond to different identity descriptions, while rows correspond to different action prompts. The generated motion sequences follow the same action prompt while adapt-ing motion style and body proportions to match the specified identity, demonstrating the model’s ability to disentangle identity from action. A small spatial offset is added to the first row to avoid occlusion. 

generated motion sequences follow the same action logic while naturally adapting body proportions to match the specified descriptions. This ability to disentangle and independently control identity and motion underscores the model’s capacity to learn a structured and versatile latent space. These qualitative results are fur-ther supported by a human perception study in our Supplementary, confirming our superiority in capturing identity-consistent motions. 

## 5 Limitations 

Despite its plausible performance, our framework has several limitations. First, shape reconstruction is sensitive to loose clothing or occlusions in reference im-ages, which can introduce noise into the predicted parameters. Second, zero-shot evaluations show that while motion consistency remains high, absolute error in-creases for extreme body types (e.g., exceptional height or mass) that lie out-side the training distribution. Future work could explore more robust identity encoders or incorporate geometric constraints to further enhance mesh fidelity under these extreme conditions. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present IAM , a novel framework for identity-aware human mo-tion generation paradigms. Through extensive experiments on the HumanML3D and IdentityMotion datasets, we demonstrated that our diffusion-based model, particularly when conditioned on multi-modal identity descriptors ( •• ), signif-icantly outperforms baselines in preserving body shape precision and motion IAM 15 

fidelity. Our model achieves state-of-the-art FID on HumanML3D and strong zero-shot generalization to unseen identities. Qualitative comparisons further confirm that our approach effectively disentangles identity from motion, allowing for fine-grained control over body proportions across diverse action sequences. Our results highlight the importance of explicitly modeling body morphology in motion generation and demonstrate that identity-aware motion synthesis is a promising direction towards more realistic and controllable human animation. 

## References 

1. Björkstrand, D., Wang, T., Bretzner, L., Sullivan, J.: Unconditional human mo-tion and shape generation via balanced score-based diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12537 (2025) 4 2. Chen, C., Zhang, J., Lakshmikanth, S.K., Fang, Y., Shao, R., Wetzstein, G., Fei-Fei, L., Adeli, E.: The language of motion: Unifying verbal and non-verbal language of 3d human motion. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 6200–6211 (2025) 3 3. Chen, X., Jiang, B., Liu, W., Huang, Z., Fu, B., Chen, T., Yu, G.: Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 18000–18010 (2023) 3 4. Choutas, V., Müller, L., Huang, C.H.P., Tang, S., Tzionas, D., Black, M.J.: Accu-rate 3d body shape regression using metric and semantic attributes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2718–2728 (2022) 9, 11 5. Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I., Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang, D., Rosen, E., et al.: Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 (2025) 5 6. Fan, K., Lu, S., Dai, M., Yu, R., Xiao, L., Dou, Z., Dong, J., Ma, L., Wang, J.: Go to zero: Towards zero-shot motion generation with million-scale data. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 13336–13348 (2025) 2, 3 7. Fan, K., Lu, S., Dai, M., Yu, R., Xiao, L., Dou, Z., Dong, J., Ma, L., Wang, J.: Go to zero: Towards zero-shot motion generation with million-scale data (2025), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07095 58. Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Let-man, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Vaughan, A., et al.: The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024) 5 9. Guo, C., Mu, Y., Javed, M.G., Wang, S., Cheng, L.: Momask: Generative masked modeling of 3d human motions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1900–1910 (2024) 2, 3, 9 10. Guo, C., Zou, S., Zuo, X., Wang, S., Ji, W., Li, X., Cheng, L.: Generating di-verse and natural 3d human motions from text. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 5152–5161 (June 2022) 2, 3, 9 11. Ho, J., Salimans, T.: Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 (2022) 6 16 Jia et al. 12. Jiang, B., Chen, X., Liu, W., Yu, J., Yu, G., Chen, T.: Motiongpt: Human motion as a foreign language. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 ,20067–20079 (2023) 3 13. Jiang, B., Chen, X., Liu, W., Yu, J., Yu, G., Chen, T.: Motiongpt: Human motion as a foreign language. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 

(2024) 2, 3 14. Jiang, J., Xiao, W., Lin, Z., Zhang, H., Ren, T., Gao, Y., Lin, Z., Cai, Z., Yang, L., Liu, Z.: Solami: Social vision-language-action modeling for immersive interac-tion with 3d autonomous characters. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 26887–26898 (2025) 2 15. Jiang, Y., Van Wouwe, T., De Groote, F., Liu, C.K.: Synthesis of biologically real-istic human motion using joint torque actuation. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) 38 (4), 1–12 (2019) 2 16. Kim, B., Jeong, H.I., Sung, J., Cheng, Y., Lee, J., Chang, J.Y., Choi, S.I., Choi, Y., Shin, S., Kim, J., et al.: Personabooth: Personalized text-to-motion generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 22756–22765 (2025) 4 17. Lee, S., Lee, S., Lee, Y., Lee, J.: Learning a family of motor skills from a single motion clip. ACM Trans. Graph. 40 (4) (2021) 2 18. Li, Z., An, S., Tang, C., Guo, C., Shugurov, I., Zhang, L., Zhao, A., Sridhar, S., Tao, L., Mittal, A.: Llamo: Scaling pretrained language models for unified mo-tion understanding and generation with continuous autoregressive tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12370 (2026) 2, 3 19. Liao, T.H., Zhou, Y., Shen, Y., Huang, C.H.P., Mitra, S., Huang, J.B., Bhat-tacharya, U.: Shape my moves: Text-driven shape-aware synthesis of human mo-tions. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 1917–1928 (2025) 2, 4, 9 20. Loper, M., Mahmood, N., Romero, J., Pons-Moll, G., Black, M.J.: SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIG-GRAPH Asia) 34 (6), 248:1–248:16 (Oct 2015) 2 21. Lu, S., Wang, J., Lu, Z., Chen, L.H., Dai, W., Dong, J., Dou, Z., Dai, B., Zhang, R.: Scamo: Exploring the scaling law in autoregressive motion generation model. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 27872–27882 (2025) 3 22. Mahmood, N., Ghorbani, N., Troje, N.F., Pons-Moll, G., Black, M.J.: AMASS: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In: International Conference on Com-puter Vision. pp. 5442–5451 (Oct 2019) 5, 8 23. Pavlakos, G., Choutas, V., Ghorbani, N., Bolkart, T., Osman, A.A.A., Tzionas, D., Black, M.J.: Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In: Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2019) 2 24. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PmLR (2021) 9 25. Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., Wolf, T.: Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 (2019) 9 26. Sawdayee, H., Guo, C., Tevet, G., Zhou, B., Wang, J., Bermano, A.H.: Dance like a chicken: Low-rank stylization for human motion diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19557 (2025) 4 IAM 17 27. Shen, Z., Pi, H., Xia, Y., Cen, Z., Peng, S., Hu, Z., Bao, H., Hu, R., Zhou, X.: World-grounded human motion recovery via gravity-view coordinates. In: SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings (2024) 5 28. Shi, M., Liu, W., Mei, J., Tse, W., Chen, R., Chen, X., Komura, T.: Motionpersona: Characteristics-aware locomotion control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00173 (2025) 229. Streuber, S., Quiros-Ramirez, M.A., Hill, M.Q., Hahn, C.A., Zuffi, S., O’Toole, A., Black, M.J.: Body talk: Crowdshaping realistic 3d avatars with words. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 35 (4), 1–14 (2016) 5 30. Tevet, G., Raab, S., Cohan, S., Reda, D., Luo, Z., Peng, X.B., Bermano, A.H., van de Panne, M.: Closd: Closing the loop between simulation and diffusion for multi-task character control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03441 (2024) 7, 9 31. Tevet, G., Raab, S., Gordon, B., Shafir, Y., Cohen-Or, D., Bermano, A.H.: Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916 (2022) 2, 3 32. Tripathi, S., Taheri, O., Lassner, C., Black, M.J., Holden, D., Stoll, C.: HUMOS: Human motion model conditioned on body shape. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 133–152. Springer (2025) 2, 4 33. Wang, X., Xu, K., Li, F., Sheng, C., Yu, J., Mu, Y.: Generating attribute-aware human motions from textual prompt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21912 (2025) 4 34. Wen, Y., Shuai, Q., Kang, D., Li, J., Wen, C., Qian, Y., Jiao, N., Chen, C., Chen, W., Wang, Y., et al.: Hy-motion 1.0: Scaling flow matching models for text-to-motion generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23464 (2025) 3 35. Wu, Y., Karunratanakul, K., Luo, Z., Tang, S.: Uniphys: Unified planner and con-troller with diffusion for flexible physics-based character control. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 13214–13224 (2025) 2 36. Xiao, L., Lu, S., Pi, H., Fan, K., Pan, L., Zhou, Y., Feng, Z., Zhou, X., Peng, S., Wang, J.: Motionstreamer: Streaming motion generation via diffusion-based autoregressive model in causal latent space. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 10086–10096 (2025) 2, 3, 4 37. Xie, W., Zheng, J., Han, J., Shi, J., Zhang, W., Bai, C., Li, X.: Textop: Real-time interactive text-driven humanoid robot motion generation and control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07439 (2026) 2 38. Xu, P., Xie, K., Andrews, S., Kry, P.G., Neff, M., McGuire, M., Karamouzas, I., Zordan, V.: Adaptnet: Policy adaptation for physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42 (6), 1–17 (2023) 2 39. Zhang, J., Zhang, Y., Cun, X., Huang, S., Zhang, Y., Zhao, H., Lu, H., Shen, X.: T2m-gpt: Generating human motion from textual descriptions with discrete representations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2023) 2, 3 40. Zhang, J., Chen, X., Yu, G., Tu, Z.: Generative motion stylization of cross-structure characters within canonical motion space. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia. pp. 7018–7026 (2024) 2 41. Zhang, J., Huang, S., Tu, Z., Chen, X., Zhan, X., Yu, G., Shan, Y.: Tapmo: Shape-aware motion generation of skeleton-free characters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12678 (2023) 2 42. Zhang, J., Weng, J., Kang, D., Zhao, F., Huang, S., Zhe, X., Bao, L., Shan, Y., Wang, J., Tu, Z.: Skinned motion retargeting with residual perception of motion semantics & geometry. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 13864–13872 (2023) 2 18 Jia et al. 43. Zhang, J., Chen, C., Chen, X., Yu, H., Xiang, T., Khan, A.S., Lakshmikanth, S.K., Adeli, E.: Vibes: A conversational agent with behaviorally-intelligent 3d virtual body. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14234 (2025) 2 44. Zhang, M., Cai, Z., Pan, L., Hong, F., Guo, X., Yang, L., Liu, Z.: Motiondif-fuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.15001 (2022) 3 45. Zhong, C., Hu, L., Zhang, Z., Xia, S.: Attt2m: Text-driven human motion generation with multi-perspective attention mechanism. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 509–519 (2023) 3 46. Zhong, L., Xie, Y., Jampani, V., Sun, D., Jiang, H.: Smoodi: Stylized motion diffu-sion model. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 405–421. Springer (2024) 4 IAM 19 

## A Video Demonstration 

The supplementary video provides a comprehensive visualization of our work, including animated results for all figures in the main paper. We recommend viewing the video to better evaluate the execution and identity-aware motion dynamics of our method.  

> Fig. 7: User study interface. Each trial presents two anonymous videos (A/B), the input prompt, and a frontal mesh reference. Participants select which video better matches motion, body shape, and overall motion–shape realism.

## B Human Perception Study 

To evaluate subjective quality, we conducted a perception study comparing our method against Shape My Move. We collected 25 valid responses, where each par-ticipant evaluated 10 trials drawn from a pool of 30 randomly sampled prompt-video pairs from the HumanML3D test set. Our model was trained exclusively on HumanML3D to ensure a fair comparison with the baseline. 

Protocol. As shown in Fig. 7, participants performed side-by-side comparisons across three metrics: (1) Motion Plausibility (alignment with the text prompt), (2) Shape Plausibility (accuracy of body morphology), and (3) Motion-Shape 20 Jia et al. 

Realism (physical synergy between motion and shape). We put an extra forced-choice paradigm with a “Cannot judge” option to minimize bias. 

Results. Quantitative results (Fig. 8) show that our method is significantly pre-ferred across all criteria ( p < 0.05 in all cases). Notably, our model demonstrates superior identity-motion synergy , indicating a more physically plausible coupling between specific body builds and their corresponding action dynamics compared to the baseline.  

> Fig. 8: User Study Results.

## C IdentityMotion Annotation Prompt 

Gemini Annotation Prompt. We provide the prompt used for data annota-tion with Gemini 2.5 Pro. 

Llama 3.2 Neutralization Prompt. We also provide the prompt utilized to anonymize identity-related descriptors from the initial Gemini-generated anno-tations, leveraging the Llama 3.2 model. IAM 21 

Gemini Annotation Prompt 

Task Overview 

You will be shown a human motion video. Your goal is to analyze the motion in detail and then write several concise text prompts that could be used to generate this motion in a text-to-motion model. Let’s do this step by step. 

Step 1: Detailed Motion Analysis 

Fill in the following JSON fields with concise, accurate, and unambiguous in-formation based on the video. - body_part_involvement: Describe the main limbs and body parts involved in the movement (e.g., "Full body, with emphasis on legs and core"). - action_sequence: A coherent, chronological description of the discrete actions. Focus on the ’what’ (e.g., "The person takes a step forward with the right foot, then squats down, then pushes up into a jump"). - temporal_progression: Describe how different body parts move in relation to one another over time. Focus on the ’how’ and ’coordination’ (e.g., "As the knees bend into the squat, the arms swing backward for momentum. The upward jump is initiated by a rapid extension of the legs, followed by the arms swinging forward and upward"). 

Step 2: Physical Description 

Fill in the following JSON fields with concise, accurate, and unambiguous in-formation based on the video. - body_description: Describe the person’s apparent age, gender, and body build (e.g., height, proportion, muscularity). 

Step 3: Classification Checklist 

For each dimension below, provide the corresponding label based on the given video. Choose EXACTLY ONE from the provided list and fill them in the following JSON fields. - Age: ‘[Baby, Child, YoungAdult, Adult, MiddleAged, OlderAdult]‘ - Gender: ‘[Male, Female, Unspecified]‘ - ActionType: ‘[Locomotion, Manipulation, Exercise, Performance, Recreation]‘ - Scene: ‘[Indoor, Outdoor]‘ 

Optional fields 

- movement_style: e.g., smooth, explosive, robotic, fluid, hesitant. - motion_speed: Overall motion speed or intensity (low, medium, high). - slow_motion: If it is a slow motion video or not (true, false). - static: If the human motion and video content is almost static or not (true, false). - detailed_action: Very detailed action description in a few words (e.g., "ballet dancing" instead of "dancing", "serving in tennis" instaed of "tennis", "swim-ming butterfly stroke" instead of "swimming"). 

Step 4: Final Prompt Synthesis 

Actively use the information you identified in previous analysis from Step 1, Step2, Step3, and the [Optional fields], generate a list of 5 distinct text prompts with diverse and detailed prompts. - The goal is to create prompts with different levels of conditioning information. For example: - (Base Prompt) A simple, high-level description of the core action. - e.g., "A man does a lunge forward." - (Styled Prompt) Incorporate the ‘movement_style‘. - e.g., "A person performs a slow and controlled lunge." - (Motion Script) A clear, sequential description of the actions, written in the present tense, much like a script’s action lines. 22 Jia et al. 

Gemini Annotation Prompt Cont. 

Clarity Rules - Be specific. Instead of "moves arm up," use "extends right arm forward until it is parallel with the ground." - All directional descriptions (left, right, forward, back) must be from the per-spective of the person performing the action. - If a person is stationary, state this explicitly and decribie it more like a pose-ture (e.g., "The person stands still,"). 

Output format Return only a valid JSON object. Do not output any text outside of the JSON object. In the ’motion_prompt’ field, return a list of 5 distinct ONLY text prompts separated by comma, DON’T include Base Prompt: or Styled Prompt: such type information. {"body_part_involvement": "...", "action_sequence": "...", "temporal_progression": "...", "body_description": "...", "classification": { "age": "...", "gender": "...", "action_type": "...", "scene": "..." }, "motion_prompt": [ "...", "...", "..." ], "movement_style": "...", "motion_speed": "...", "slow_motion": "...", "static": "...", "detailed_action": "..." }IAM 23 

Llama Neutralization Prompt 

Task 

You will be given a list of motion description of a human performing an action. Your task is to neutralize the description by removing any identity-related, role-related, scene-related, or body-build information, while keeping all motion details intact. 

Rules 

- CRITICAL: STRICTLY MUST replace all gendered pronouns (he, she, him, her, his, hers) with neutral forms ("they", "them", or "their"). This is mandatory for every sentence. - Replace words describing identity or gender (e.g., man, woman, boy, girl, male, female) 

→ Replace with neutral human references such as "a person", "an individual", or "a human". 

→ Keep grammatical consistency (e.g., "A man" => "A person", "An old woman" => "An individual"). - Remove words describing age, body build, or appearance (e.g., young, old, adult, fit, slender, muscular, heavyset, tall, short, beautiful, handsome, etc.) - Remove all garment descriptions (e.g., blue T-shirt, shorts, white dress, red swimsuit). - Remove occupational or role terms implying identity (e.g., dancer, ath-lete, martial artist, performer, worker, actor). - Keep all motion details (actions, postures, transitions, tempo, limb move-ments). - Do not infer or add new details. - CRITICAL: STRICTLY MUST rewrite the sentence so that it is gram-matically correct and fluent. - CRITICAL: STRICTLY MUST process EACH element independently (do not merge or deduplicate them). 

Output format Output the rewritten, neutralized motion descriptions in the same list format as the input, e.g.: "neutralized_prompt": [ "...", "...", "..." ]Do not print any commentary or code.