Generate, Track, Improve: Perceptive Multi-Skill Humanoid
Locomotion with RL-Fine-Tuned Motion Generators
Zachary Olkin, William D. Compton, Aaron D. Ames
Fig. 1: Demonstration of our perceptive control policies working across multiple terrains in indoor and outdoor settings. (a) Ascending a 15 step real world
staircase including transitions into and out of the stair climb. (b) Jumping onto a box, walking across it, and jumping off the box. (c) Outdoor walking
locomotion including turning onto a path. (d) Running across an indoor space. (e) Descending a real world stair case.
Abstract— General purpose humanoids require locomotion
controllers that are multi-skill, perceptive, dynamic, and robust
enough to go anywhere humans can. In this work, we present
a two layer locomotion architecture: (1) a perceptive flow
matching motion generator plans whole body trajectories from
raw depth images while a (2) perceptive tracking policy trained
with control-guided RL follows these motions. Both policies are
trained on a library of terrain consistent motion clips created
with dynamically optimized human data which yields both
accurate velocity tracking and terrain consistent references.
Our central contribution is a simple yet effective off-policy
RL fine tuning loop that improves the motion generator. A
structured search method is used with the generator to gather
data for advantage weighted regression. This off-policy loop is
much more sample efficient than on-policy residual fine tuning
and improves terrain consistency on unseen geometries and
skill compositions. We find that successful terrain traversals
increased by up to 25 percentage points and skill selection
improved by up to 80 percentage points. By using raw depth
images to perceive the environment no odometry or height
maps are needed, and outdoor deployment is easy. With two
cameras, the policy can see terrain coming from further away
and adjust its velocity regardless of the commanded speed so it
can traverse the terrain. A single policy pair enables a Unitree
G1 humanoid to walk, run, stand, jump on and off of boxes, and
traverse stairs in outdoor environments. Project page: https:
//zolkin1.github.io/generate-track-improve/.
The authors are with the Department of Control and Dynamical
Systems at the California Institute of Technology. This research is supported
by the Technology Innovation Institute (TII).
I. INTRODUCTION
Between the diversity of skills required and the inherently
perceptive nature of real world locomotion, humanoid robots
have yet to be seen reliably operating in the real world. In
recent years many humanoid locomotion modalities, such
as walking [1], [2], [3], running [4], [5], parkour [6], [7],
[8], stair traversals [9], [10], [11], and much more have
been studied. Yet, even with this explosion in capability,
there are many challenges in humanoid whole body control
and locomotion still yet to be solved. For example, many
terrain aware locomotion policies [9], [10], [12], [13], [14]
are not built to be extensible to general whole body control
or multi-speed (walking, running, etc...) locomotion. This
makes it difficult for those robots to go anywhere in the real
world at a commanded speed or extended to interact with the
environment like opening doors or pressing elevator buttons.
On the other hand, multi-purpose whole body controllers
[15], [16] have emerged that can track many motions, but
these are lacking the perception and terrain aware motions
needed to traverse the real world. In this work we bridge
these ideas by making a pair of perceptive policies that
together allow the robot to generate terrain aware references
and track those references in real time.
To tackle this challenge, we leverage a layered architecture
with a motion generation layer interfacing into a tracking
layer where both policies are perceptive. Then, we also
arXiv:2609.31577v1  [cs.RO]  25 Sep 2026


present a simple but highly effective RL fine tuning loop that
can improve the mode selection and terrain consistency of the
motion generator policy. This generator and tracker paradigm
is not the only way to create a multi-skill and perceptive
policy; others have used multi-expert distillation [17], [6],
or created generators that produce both kinematic trajectories
and actions [18]. In comparison to these other methods, the
generator and tracker paradigm leads to modularity through
a layered architecture and the ability to easily add additional
skills, provided a general enough tracking controller. This is
ideal for scaling up generality in humanoids. Further, this
provides a natural computation split, allowing a relatively
light weight tracking controller to be used at a high speed
while the larger motion generator can be queried at a slower
speed.
A. Related Works
Humanoid whole body and locomotion control uses RL
methods. Controllers are generally trained in simulation
[19] with PPO [20]. Dynamic and human like motions are
commonly achieved with “mimic” style approaches [21],
[22], [23], [15]. These methods offer great performance,
clean results, and minimal reward tuning at the mere cost
of obtaining a reference trajectory. Human data [24], [22],
[25], [26], [27], reduced order models [28], [2], [29], [30],
[10], optimized dynamic trajectories [2], [4], [31], [32], [33],
and animation [34], [23] have all been used to synthesize
reference trajectories. Many of these mimic style approaches
create controllers that can do motion “play back” but still
lack more general purpose skills or an interface for auton-
omy. In locomotion, achieving this autonomy interface is
commonly done through velocity conditioning [5], periodic
orbit creation [4], [2], or reduced order models that can
be queried in training for the desired motion at any point
in time [28], [10]; each of which allow the robot to track
a commanded velocity, which is something a higher level
navigation policy might output.
Even with some methods using perception to traverse
terrain, perceptive locomotion is still an evolving research
direction [35]. Perceptive humanoid locomotion has a few
major paradigms such as use of a height field [36], [12],
[11], [37], or using direct sensor measurements [6], [9], [10],
[17]. Use of a height field creates difficulty in deployment
as it requires a height scanning package and odometry in
general [38]. Using the raw depth camera inputs removes
this blocker at the expense of needing to simulate the sensor
and requiring that the network outputs are observable given
the view of the cameras.
The generator and tracker paradigm is gaining momentum
in the humanoid control space, but is still a relatively nascent
architecture. SONIC [15] achieved this paradigm with a kine-
matic motion generator paired with their universal tracking
policy. Critically, their generator was not perceptive and
designed for just flat ground traversal. PARC [7] proposes a
perceptive tracker generator pipeline that can generate novel
motions from a finite starting set. The pipeline is not shown
on hardware, being restricted to simulated characters, thus
leaving its applicability to real robots in question. Even so,
the resulting motions are impressive, but the method requires
kinematic and dynamic correction steps which in conjunction
with the diffusion policy training takes one month for three
iterations of training. This is much slower than our proposed
method. The authors of [36] demonstrate a perceptive gen-
erator and tracker for humanoids, but their method requires
odometry and a height scan, does not show accurate velocity
tracking or outdoor experiments and requires fine tuning
of the tracker. Our method uses raw depth cameras, no
odometry, shows accurate velocity tracking, and critically
we provide a pipeline for improving the generator with RL
which fixes issues that tracker fine tuning can’t fix.
The idea of using RL for fine tuning flow match-
ing and diffusion policies has been used in VLAs [39],
[40] and for smaller behavior cloning (BC) policies doing
manipulation/loco-manipulation on legged and wheeled sys-
tems [41], [42]. In [41] the authors use an on-policy algo-
rithm, DPPO [43], and a reduced action space, which does
not directly control the legs, for the diffusion policy outputs.
Separately, there is a group of fine tuning methods that freeze
the generator and either learn residual actions [42] or steer
the latent noise [44], [45] with [45] doing both. In [42]
they use off-policy RL to learn residual actions and apply
this to manipulation instead of dynamic locomotion. These
methods target manipulation policies with low dimensional
action spaces. Our setting differs both in its application to
dynamic locomotion but also in that we adjust the original
generator’s weights.
B. Contributions
Full Architecture: In this paper we present Generate,
Track, Improve: a full pipeline for the creation of a tracker
and generator policy pair that enables perceptive humanoid
locomotion across multiple terrains. The tracker policy is
trained with CLF-RL in simulation to enable precise and
robust tracking of the dynamic motions [4]. The generator is
a flow matching [46] transformer conditioned on raw depth
images from multiple cameras and velocity commands which
generates a whole body trajectory every 0.24 s and passes
this to the tracker. Together, these policies enable a humanoid
robot to traverse real world environments with skills such as
running, walking, jumping on and off of boxes and traversing
a variety of stairs.
Data Pipeline: The data used to build the CLF-RL ref-
erences comes originally from human motion capture. We
utilize an optimization step in the data processing pipeline
to create hundreds of dynamically feasible, velocity accurate,
and periodic motions for the robot to track. The optimization
allows us to re-target the single references we use for terrain
interaction into many different references across multiple
terrain geometries. Beyond these benefits, we pair these
optimized motions with the generative model Motion Bricks
[47] to create motion clips that transition between terrain
segments and different velocities. This pairing of Motion
Bricks and optimization is shown to provide low velocity
tracking error and terrain consistent references.


Generator RL Fine Tuning: After using this data to
train the tracker and generator we present an off-policy RL
training loop for the generator that iteratively improves its
results using its own closed loop rollouts, and a frozen
tracker. Given the generator produces just under 3,000 val-
ues per plan (for a whole body trajectory), applying naive
PPO on the outputs results in extremely inefficient search
as independent gaussian noise on those actions does not
lead to the structured trajectories that would create better
references. In contrast, our method searches through the
flow matching initial noise samples and by perturbing the
conditioning values in the rollouts, allowing the generator
to search other modes without adding noise to the actions.
Using this diverse dataset from the rollouts we train a critic
and compute advantage labels on the dataset. Using this
advantage we perform advantage weighted regression [48]
to update the generator via supervised learning. This process
is then repeated, resulting in the success rate increases of
up to 25 percentage points and improving skill selection by
up to 80 percentage points. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first time RL fine tuning on a perceptive
generative model has been used for dynamic and terrain
aware humanoid locomotion.
Perceptive Inputs: The tracker and generator are con-
ditioned directly on the depth images rather than using a
height map or learned representation; and no odometry is
required. This makes deployment very easy and robust. We
use two depth cameras which allow us to see objects before
a downward facing camera would see them. This enables
the robot to slow down upon approaching obstacles so it
can traverse the terrain at the correct speed without needing
the velocity command to change. We demonstrate that the
robot retains accurate velocity tracking with only minimal
deviations to traverse the terrain and how removal of the
upper depth camera would cripple this capability. In our
method the velocity command can be independent of the
terrain and the robot will adjust as necessary.
Hardware Deployment: We demonstrate this policy ex-
tensively on real humanoid robot hardware to walk, run,
stand, jump and traverse stairs with ease (see Fig. 1). We
do this both in lab settings and outdoors in real world
environments, demonstrating real world capabilities rarely
shown in other perceptive dynamic humanoid locomotion
policies.
II. METHODS
A. System Overview
The presented method has four main parts as shown
in Fig. 2: (1) the data pipeline, (2) the tracker training,
(3) the generator training, and (4) the RL fine tuning of
the generator. After these steps two distinct policies are
deployed: the fine tuned motion generator and the tracking
policy. The tracker runs at 50 Hz as is common in RL
control policies while the generator is only queried once
every 0.24 seconds (i.e. every 12 control steps). The tracker
takes in proprioceptive information and one camera depth
image to compute actions while the generator takes in the
desired velocity, its previous action, and two depth images to
compute a 1.24 second long whole body trajectory. The data
pipeline provides the terrain consistent reference motions for
the tracker and generator to train on while the fine tuning
improves the generator after it is already trained.
B. Motion Clip Creation
Our method requires pre-made terrain aware motion clips
for the tracking policy. The details of their creation are given
here. We start with human data from the bones-seed data set
[49]. We use this data to create optimized human references
similar to [4], [31]. 252 flat ground steady-state reference
motions are generated including straight walking (forward
and backwards), diagonal walking, turning walking, turning
in place, side step walking, straight running and running
while turning. This gives the robot a wide range of omni-
directional locomotion capabilities. Then, additionally, 46
reference motions for jumping onto and off of boxes, as well
as going up and down stairs are generated.
The optimization uses a multiple shooting state con-
strained formulation with MuJoCo [50] as the dynamics
back-end [31]. This design allows for small changes to
the contact schedule by differentiating through the MuJoCo
contact dynamics while still gaining the stability of the
multiple shooting method. The state constraints afforded by
the multiple shooting are critical as they allow us to enforce
a periodic constraint (i.e. the final state is equal to the initial
state) and an average velocity constraint which can adjust
the reference motion to exactly the desired speed.
The terrain based motions in the open source bones-
seed dataset don’t have the ground truth terrain information.
Therefore we start by placing terrain to match the motion.
Then we can use the same optimization as before but with
the terrain placed in the MuJoCo scene. Once the initial solve
is complete, with these default terrain parameters, we have
ground truth contact information from the simulation. The
ground truth contact information is gathered by thresholding
the contact force on the relevant end effector bodies and
then filtering out any short patches of contact/no contact.
We found this to be more reliable than detecting contact
by pure kinematics, and it is a benefit of using a dynamics
optimization. With the ground truth contact the robot is
kinematically retargeted onto a variety of terrain dimensions,
which is especially useful since the dataset does not have
every dimension we may see in the real world. To do the
kinematic retargeting we compute foot offsets so that in
contact the feet are placed on the terrain. Then we smoothly
interpolate the offsets from one contact to the next to get
a continuous deformation of the end effector trajectory and
then we use inverse kinematics to get the joint angles. After
the kinematic retargeting onto the other heights we can run
the dynamic optimization again to get a feasible and smooth
terrain aware motion.
In total, this optimization routine generates steady state
flat ground locomotion at a variety of speeds as well as
episodic and steady state terrain motions over a variety of
geometries. Using these optimized motions, the next step is


Fig. 2: Overview of the presented method. First, human data is translated into motion clips to make a motion library through optimization and generative
models. Secondly, a perceptive tracking policy is trained using CLF-RL to track the motion library. Then the motion library and the tracking policy are
used to gather depth images that the robot sees at a given state. These depth images are paired with the commanded velocity and the motion library to
generate the data for the flow matching generator training. The generator is trained with supervised learning using the flow MSE loss. Then lastly, the
generator is fine tuned using off policy RL. The generator and tracker are rolled out in simulation to gather data, which is fed into a buffer. A critic is
trained to estimate the infinite horizon reward at each state and then that critic is used to assign advantage labels to the data. The generator is then updated
using advantage weighted regression (AWR) to adjust its output distribution. Finally, this policy pair can be deployed on hardware to make the robot
perceptively locomote in real world environments.
to generate the full motion clips that will be used by the
tracker and generator trainings. These motion clips range
anywhere from 6 to 20 seconds and are grouped by family:
jump off, jump on, stairs down pure, stairs up pure, stairs
down transition, stairs up transition, and flat. To generate
these motion clips, velocity profiles are sampled and for
each steady state velocity command, the closest steady state
optimized reference is chosen. Then Motion Bricks [47] is
used to do motion in-betweening. This does the same work
that something like motion matching [6] could do, but much
faster and smoother.
10,000 motion clips are generated over 140 different tile
geometries to create a single motion library. This allows the
training to see many different velocity profiles over the same
geometry and many different geometries.
C. Tracker
To create the tracker we train an RL policy that tracks the
pre-made motions generated above. To accomplish this we
utilize a variant of CLF-RL [2], which we choose because it
has shown to provide lower tracking error [4]. This variant
of CLF-RL tracks body positions for all the links instead of
the joint angles. We also introduce an additional scaling term
to help balance the numerical properties without sacrificing
the CLF properties (see the appendix for more details). The
tracker rewards include the two CLF-RL tracking rewards,
an undesired contact penalty, torque limit penalty, joint limit
penalty, action rate penalty, and a torque penalty.
This is a perceptive policy and therefore takes in a depth
camera scan which has self scanning. This scan is only 30x26
pixels and on hardware is constructed by down-sampling
the 600p image. This follows a similar vein to [10] which
also uses raw depth scans that see its own links. The full
observations are given in Table I. The network is a feed
forward MLP that encodes the reference and commanded
velocity information which then feeds into another MLP
which also takes the proprioceptive and depth inputs all
with ELU activations. The reference and command MLP has
hidden dimensions [1024, 512, 512] and the full MLP has
hidden dimensions [1024, 512, 256, 128].
The policy runs at 50 Hz and outputs joint position targets
that go into joint level PD controllers. The action rates
and gains are derived from [22]. Domain randomization on
physical values such as the center of mass, joint friction,
ground restitution, and camera angles and offsets is used
to ease sim-to-real transfer. Further, noise on the reference
trajectory, depth camera readings, and proprioceptive inputs
is also used. The RL tracking controller was trained in
IsaacLab [51] using 8192 environments on a single H100
for 20,000 iterations, lasting approximately 48 hours. PPO
with asymmetric actor critic is used to train this policy with
the implementation from RSL-RL [52].
D. Generator
The generator is a flow matching transformer that is auto-
regressive in nature with the only sensor observation being
the depth images. The depth images go through a CNN
into tokens that feed into the transformer. The transformer


Term
Size
History
Joint angles
29
10x
Joint velocities
29
10x
Projected gravity
3
10x
Root angular velocity
3
10x
Previous action
29
10x
Lower depth camera
780
N/A
Reference trajectory
572
N/A
Velocity command
39
N/A
TABLE I: Tracker observation terms and their sizes. The terms with a history
are stacked over that many steps.
also gets the velocity command and a trajectory history in
the form of a subset of nodes of the previously generated
trajectory. Each node of the history becomes a token. The
flow matching head outputs the reference trajectory.
The transformer is structured so each of the CNN out-
puts per camera get their own token (56 per camera/112
total perceptive tokens). Each node in the trajectory history
gets its own token, and the velocity commands are split
across 13 tokens. There is full self attention on all of the
conditioning/“prefix” tokens, but these tokens do not attend
to the output trajectory tokens in the flow matching head.
This means that the internal representation of the depth
images, velocity command, and history are independent of
the current flow matching velocity field output. This allows
the transformer encoder to be used later in the RL fine tuning,
and it also speeds up inference time as the prefix encoder
only needs to be computed once then it can be cached and
re-used at each integration step. The output tokens attend to
the conditioning tokens. The perceptive tokens get positional
embedding based on their angle in the camera field of view.
The inputs to the CNN from the depth camera have five
channels: depth, x, y, and z positions, and a valid binary.
The depth is just the raw depth from the down sampled
image. The three position coordinates are the positions of
that pixel in 3D space relative to a frame at the root link
of the robot in gravity aligned space and aligned with the
yaw of the robot. So as the robot yaws, this frame moves
but as it pitches or rolls the frame does not move. These
coordinates are computed via forward kinematics to get the
transform from the root link to the camera pose and then
transforming the position of the depth pixel into the root
frame. This gravity aligned root frame is the frame that the
flow matching produces the root positions in. Given the lack
of proprioception entering into the flow matching policy we
found that these additional coordinate inputs were critical
for getting the generator to work on terrain. Without using
these position coordinates the robot cannot discern certain
situations, such as if the robot is leaning towards terrain or
if terrain is getting closer without the robot moving.
To collect data for the training we use the trained tracker
policy and have it follow the pre-made motion clips it is
trained on. We record the depth images and the reference
trajectory before (for the history) and after that point (for the
predicted trajectory). We choose to use the actual RL rollout
to make the visited states of the depth camera as realistic as
possible. Additionally, we hold a buffer of previous depth
camera measurements so that we can train the generator
to account for lag in the depth camera measurements by
using an image out of the buffer instead of the most current
image. After we have collected an initial dataset size of
200,000 points we now augment the data. We do this data
augmentation to emphasize in the data how the reference
must be terrain consistent. To do this augmentation, all the
data points that have a trajectory that is fully or partially on
terrain are used. At these data points we sample a random
distance along the terrain and with a yaw offset and apply
this to the state of the robot, then the depth image is re-
casted from this spot and the reference stays the same. This
shows the training that these axes must stay correct relative
to the terrain even as the robot moves. We do 3 augmentation
points per relevant data point.
During training, 20% of the data points have their history
replaced with a learned null embedding. This does two
things: (1) it forces the policy to not just continue what the
history was doing and instead it must learn the mapping
from the velocity command and depth image to the output
trajectory and (2) it gives us a learned parameter to use as the
history for the first inference when there is no history to use
yet. Also, in training we add noise to the history trajectory
to make the policy more robust to its own outputs when it
runs auto-regressively online. We find that the final trained
policy is very robust and stable in its auto-regressive rollouts
even though it is never trained to see its own outputs, it is
only ever teacher forced.
The flow matching generator is trained for 100 epochs on
an H100 GPU taking about 12 hours to complete. When we
deploy the generator we use eight Euler integration steps. The
model has eight layers with each layer having eight heads.
The feed forward networks are size 2048 and dmodel is size
512. There are 26.8 M total learnable parameters.
E. RL Fine Tuning for the Generator
After the initial training, the flow matching policy can be
run in the loop with the tracker, yet it still struggles with out
of distribution terrains and task compositions. To address
these concerns we propose a simple yet effective method for
RL fine tuning of the motion generator, not the tracker, as
shown in Fig. 3. The motion generator is formulated as a
flow matching transformer that outputs almost 3,000 values
(a whole body trajectory) each re-plan. Due to the fact that
this is a flow matching model and the high dimensional
output space we choose to use an RL algorithm that relies
on supervised learning and where exploration doesn’t enter
through gaussian noise on the outputs. As we show in the
results below, doing something like PPO on a residual policy
is very data inefficient and difficult to explore with.
We utilize advantage labeling for advantage weighted
regression (AWR) [48] as an off policy RL algorithm that
utilizes supervised learning. Therefore our algorithm has
three main parts: (1) data collection, (2) critic learning and
advantage labeling and (3) supervised learning of the flow
matching policy. Importantly, rather than inserting gaussian
noise on all the action outputs, which does not lead to
efficient search for a 3,000 dimensional action space, we


Fig. 3: Generator RL fine tuning architecture. The overall process is depicted
here: collect data, train the critic, and update the generator. The transformer
architectures are also depicted here, showing the prefix encoder and how it
is frozen in critic training and updated in the generator. A value head is used
for the critic while a velocity field action head is used for the generator.
instead perturb the conditioning to allow the robot to see
different possible actions, that are still reasonable, as well
as spawning the robot into a variety of positions that it may
not have achieved with the original policy, and using the
noise on the initial sample in the flow matching. This lets us
“search” in a more structured manner. When we perturb the
conditioning we still store the nominal conditioning so that
the policy training sees that as a valid action at the state it
was actually at. Since this is an off policy algorithm we don’t
need to collect too much data which is helpful as rollouts
now need to simulate the physics, query the tracking policy,
and run inference on the flow matching transformer for eight
integration steps. This makes rollouts more expensive to
collect compared to the tracker PPO learning.
To give more details, we start by describing the RL
formulation for the generator fine tuning problem at hand.
Consider states sk ∈S and actions ak ∈A where k denotes
the re-plan step. Note that the steps in this RL environment
are re-planning steps as the tracking policy is frozen. So from
the perspective of this MDP, the tracker is effectively part of
the dynamics of the robot and not something that can be
adjusted. The state is all of the conditioning variables: the
depth scan, reference history and velocity command, while
the actions are the full trajectory and therefore A ⊂RH×ℓ
where H are the number of nodes in the trajectory and ℓis
the dimension of a single node, so in our case H = 62 and
ℓ= 44 so that H × ℓ= 2728. The flow matching policy
produces a sampled action given a state: ak ∼πF M(a|sk).
Then we can define a step wise reward rk = r(sk, ak) as
a function of the states and actions and define a sequence
of state action pairs as τ = {(s0, a0), (s1, a1), ....} which
implicitly defines a corresponding set of rewards rk. The
infinite horizon discounted reward is
JπF M (s) =
∞
X
k=0
γkrk.
(1)
The specific rewards used are given in Table II. These
rewards encourage terrain consistency first and foremost. The
terrain penetration penalizes bodies that intersect terrain and
the terrain contact term penalizes bodies that should be in
contact (as determined by a kinematic classifier) that are
either too far into terrain or too far away from it. These
rewards are inspired by the rewards from [7]. Additionally,
we have velocity tracking and success rewards that are mod-
ulated by terrain consistency. Velocity tracking and success
are therefore secondary rewards that only provide significant
rewards when the terrain consistency is good. Given that
deviating from the commanded velocity may be desired when
traversing terrain, this allows us to reward both in a consistent
way. The success is gated on the worst terrain consistency
over the episode and therefore only provides a strong reward
signal when every plan is terrain consistent.
To start training, we need to collect data. We do this by
running the robot with the fixed motion tracker in IsaacLab
where the flow matching policy is driving it. Critically, this
allows us to abandon the pre-made motion clips at this point
and fine tune on any terrain. We create a FIFO data buffer
that holds D data points. Each data point is a pair (s, a) as
described above. At the start we collect 2,000 episodes worth
of data points (re-plans). Then each subsequent iteration we
only collect 500 more episodes worth of data and insert them
into the buffer, ejecting 500 episodes worth of the oldest data
points.
Our method relies on utilizing advantage estimates to
understand which state actions pairs are better. Therefore we
fit a critic network to predict the infinite horizon discounted
reward JπF M (s). We train the critic through fitted value
iteration (FVI) and we utilize the frozen prefix encoder from
the original generator and thus only train a value head. For
the first iteration of FVI we estimate the rewards through
a Monte Carlo estimate with no bootstrapping: V (si) ≈
P∞
k=i rk with terminations that truncate the rollout. If the
rollout terminates due to a failure at step k then all future
rewards are set to 0. Otherwise if the robot doesn’t fall then
we still truncate the rollout but bootstrap a tail value that is
just the reward of the last step. For all iterations of FVI at
n > 0 we use a N-step lookahead and bootstrap with the


Term
Value
Terrain Penetration (rpen)
PNb
b=1 wb
P
p∈P (b) −min{sdf(p), 0}
Terrain Contact (rcon)
PNb
b=1 cb minp∈P (b) |sdf(p)|
Terrain Consistency (rterr)
exp(−(wcrcon + wprpen))
Velocity Tracking (rvel)
sin( π
2 (rterr)svel) exp(−|vx −vcmd
x
|/σ)
Success (rsucc)
sin( π
2 (mink rterr)ssucc) · C1reached
Total
rterr + rvel + rsucc
TABLE II: Rewards for the generator RL. These rewards encourage terrain consistency then velocity tracking and success secondarily. Nb denotes the
number of body links and P(b) is the set of points on a given body. sdf(p) denotes the distance using a signed distance field from terrain to that point.
svel and ssucc are tuning terms to affect how sharply the terrain terms fall off.
previous value of V †:
V n(s) = (1 −γ)
N−1
X
k=0
γkrk + γNV n−1(sN).
(2)
After running FVI we use the critic for advantage labeling.
The advantage is A(s, a) = R(s, a)−V (s) where R(s, a) is
computed as the sampled return from a state. No critic is used
in the computation of R(s, a) as it unrolls the trajectory to
termination with no bootstrapping so the true return is always
used for advantage labeling. In practice we choose to use a
normalized advantage ˜A =
A
σA where σA is the standard
deviation of A computed once per RL iteration. Then the
advantage weight β, used below, can we written in terms of
normalized units. We train two critics, each on half the data,
and use them to label advantages on the other portion of the
data to prevent potential issues with memorizing episodes
given there are multiple data points with the same success
or failure label in a given episode.
Once we have the advantages we can label each data
point and then weight the importance of each data point by
its advantage: w = min{exp( 1
β ˜A(s, a)), L} where L is an
upper bound on the weight. Then we use these weights for
the flow matching MSE loss by uniformly sampling a time
t ∈[0, 1] and sampling an initial noise draw x0 ∼N(0, I)
and interpolating to get xt = (1 −t)x0 + tx1. The linear
velocity field is given by v∗= x1 −x0 and the weighted
flow matching loss is:
L = 1
B
B
X
i
wi
Hℓ∥vθ(xi
t, ti, si) −v∗∥2
F
(3)
where B is the batch size, and ∥· ∥F is the Frobenius norm.
Additional data can be inserted into this process easily. We
can choose to use data from the pre-training in the fine tuning
by adding it into the flow matching update with weight one
and not using it in the critic learning or advantage labeling.
Therefore we can easily mitigate any potential issues with
forgetting previous behaviors.
We do RL fine tuning of the generator for 5 iterations.
In each iteration five epochs are used in the flow matching
update. Training occurs on a single H100 GPU and lasts
about six hours (although this can vary depending on the
terrain, episode length, and other factors).
†We regress the (1−γ) scaled value so targets are in the reward scale.
F. Deployment
To deploy the policies on the hardware we choose to run
them on an NVIDIA Jetson Thor. Flow matching inference
time is around 11 ms while the tracker is less than 1 ms.
Although the generator is only queried once every 0.24 s,
mitigating the delay between sensor input and new trajectory
is still critical for dynamic motions. The two cameras are a
Zed X mini and Zed X which both feed into a NVIDIA
Jetson Orin for depth processing and down sampling before
being sent over ROS2 to the Thor. In training we only
simulate the down sampled pixels instead of simulating the
whole camera and down sampling there. The Zed X sits
towards the top of the torso and points mostly forward while
the Zed X mini is on the lower part of the torso and sees the
legs and the ground immediately under the robot. The Thor
and Orin are both powered from the robot and a joystick is
connected over Bluetooth for providing velocity commands.
III. RESULTS
Given this architecture, we can deploy the policies on
real robots and across simulations to study its performance.
The effects of fine tuning, choice of algorithm, the velocity
tracking and terrain traversal, using two cameras, and the
data pipeline are studied quantitatively. Additionally, hard-
ware experiments on the Unitree G1 are run to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the policy on a real robot outdoors and
indoors in real world environments.
A. RL Fine Tuning
The generator RL fine tuning allows us to improve and
adapt the generator to out of distribution environments or
tasks, such as having additional walls in view, or task
compositions like jumping on then off of a box. To test the
effects of the RL fine tuning we created 4 distinct out of
distribution fine tuning configurations: (1) boxes, which has
1 - 2 boxes of varying widths and heights, (2) stairs that go
up then down with varying widths, 1-2 walls flanking it, a
start and end platform, and a central platform between an up
and down set of stairs, (3) a multi-terrain setup that includes
terrains from the boxes, stairs, some in distribution terrains,
and a realistic building entry way that includes two stair
cases of varying dimensions, walls, and a landing between
the stair cases, and (4) an in-distribution set of terrain that
were used for the original generator and tracker training.
The first three of these terrains are out-of-distribution for a
number of reasons including that the policy was never trained
to do a box jump up and down in a single episode, box widths


Fig. 4: Effects of using the RL fine tuning for both out of distribution and in distribution terrains. The out of distribution terrains vary in both the task
being accomplished and the terrain. The success rate is shown in (a) where a success is counted as having reached the goal area without falling and within
the given time. The goal regions are across the terrain. Plot (b) shows the mean contact penalty so a lower number is better, and therefore the fine tuned
policies are more terrain consistent than the pre-trained policies. Finally (c) shows what fraction of sampled episodes get every mode (skill) correct. For
example, for the two box terrain this includes two jump ups and two jump downs. The fine tuned policies drastically improve mode selection: on one stairs
terrain it increases from 0% correct to about 80% correct. 95% confidence intervals are given in each plot as error bars.
were varied, walls were added around the stairs, and entirely
new terrains, like the entry way, were added.
Fig. 4 shows the improvements gained from the RL fine
tuning. The success rates increased across the board by
as much as 25 percentage points while the mean contact
penalty decreased, showing better agreement between the
terrain and the trajectory, and finally, the choice of “mode”
significantly improved for each terrain type too. The mode
here is referring to the skill used to traverse the terrain, e.g.
using a stairs trajectory or box jump trajectory. The choice
of mode is determined by rolling out 50 samples per policy
and per terrain. Then the rollouts were randomly shuffled
together to prevent bias and a human manually labeled each
of the modes chosen, and if the human could not determine
the type of mode taken it was counted as incorrect. This
demonstrates the capabilities of the generator RL to shift the
output distribution to the preferred mode, increase success
rates, and increase terrain consistency. Adjusting this choice
of mode is not something that can be achieved with fine
tuning the tracker policy, making this a complementary tool.
The multi-terrain fine tuning was the policy that was
deployed on hardware. The multi-terrain fine tuning shows
the ability of the fine tuning to work across terrain types and
skills. This fine tuning also included data from the original
pre-training as discussed above. This allows us to both train
on new environments while also feeding in the original data
making sure the generator doesn’t forget other motions.
B. Algorithm Comparison
Having shown the importance of fine tuning the pre-trained
policy we now study our algorithmic choices. Our method
updates the policy via supervised regression on off-policy
rollouts using advantage weighting (AWR). We compare
to four other methods: filtered behavior cloning (filt. BC)
[53], arrival filtering (keeping all the data in rollouts that
reach the goal region), plain BC/self distillation, and AWR
without the perturbed conditioning (AWR no pert.). The
plain BC removes the advantage information entirely and
asks if having any data on this new terrain is helpful even
in the absence of a critic or selection mechanism. The
arrival filtering and filtered BC investigate how the choice
of selection method affects the results. The removal of the
perturbed conditioning isolates the effect of that specific
search methodology.
Fig. 5: Comparison between different fine tuning algorithms and search
methods for the generator relative to using AWR as described above.
The methods are compared across terrains and across a strict and loose
termination for the boxes. The AWR algorithm performs equivalently or
better than each other algorithm in both metrics. The 95% confidence
intervals are given in the plot.
Fig. 5 shows that AWR consistently matches or out per-
forms all the other algorithmic choices both in success rate
and terrain consistency. Plain BC fails badly, demonstrating
that some form of advantage or selection mechanism is
critical. The other two selection variants both generally
perform worse than AWR in both success rate and terrain
consistency. We find that the arrival filtering is much more
sensitive to the choice of termination. Switching from the
strict termination (i.e. terminating more than 12 cm from
the generated trajectory) to the loose termination (30 cm
termination bound) we find that the arrival filtering loses
about 10 percentage points of its success rate relative to AWR
while the filtered BC is consistently 5-10 percentage points
behind AWR. By having terminations based on tracking
performance the arrival filtering can implicitly improve the
terrain consistency metric, which is why it is not as bad as


plain BC, but it still cannot match the AWR performance. Re-
moving the conditioning perturbations reduces success by 4-
6 percentage points. The contact penalty is also much higher
on the multi-terrain with consistently worse performance on
stair terrains. Overall, the learned advantage function, the
advantage-weighted updates, and the conditioning perturba-
tions each contribute to performance, consistently improving
success rates and, in most settings, terrain consistency, which
motivates our use of this policy on hardware.
We further compare with using PPO to train a residual
policy that takes as observation the generator output and
its observations, and outputs a residual adjustment to the
trajectory. This residual policy has an action space the size
of the full generator output. If the residual worked in theory
this could be used to distill back into the original generator.
This lets us study how our algorithm compares to a residual
fine tuning method using PPO, which is on-policy. The PPO
baseline uses the same rewards as the off policy algorithm.
We find that the PPO method is significantly less data
efficient: we stopped training after 2,000 iterations at which
point it had used more than 160x the data of the off policy
algorithm and took more than 30x the wall clock time. At
this point, the PPO baseline achieves a success rate around
13 percentage points below the AWR’s. Although it may
still continue to trend upwards, it would require substantially
more data and compute time. Therefore we conclude that an
off policy algorithm like AWR is the better approach for RL
fine tuning in this context.
C. Velocity Tracking and Terrain Traversal
Using the fine tuned policy we can see how well the robot
tracks velocities before, after, and during terrain traversals.
It should be noted that the terrain traversals cannot happen
at any speed. We don’t have a stairs sprinting trajectory and
we don’t have the ability to jump onto a box at fast speeds
either. Therefore, it is expected and desired for the robot
to slow itself down. Yet, having to command the correct
velocity to traverse an obstacle is undesired. Therefore the
policy can use its depth cameras to autonomously adjust its
speed to meet the needs of the terrain. Fig. 6 demonstrates
how the policy pair leads to accurate velocity tracking at a
variety of speeds and how it can slow down to the necessary
speed to traverse an obstacle and then go back to the desired
speed. This figure also shows how the fine tuned policy
does not lose its ability to track velocities, even with the
perturbed conditioning during training. 50 rollouts at each
speed in MuJoCo were used to evaluate the policy each
with a different random seed for the flow matching sampling.
Therefore this also validates the sim-to-sim performance of
the policy.
D. Hardware Deployment
Figs. 1 and 7 demonstrate the robot working in both
outdoor and indoor settings. By using the raw depth cam-
era readings the transfer to the outdoors is easy and no
adjustments are needed relative to the inside. We see the
robot climb 15 consecutive steps without issue demonstrating
Fig. 6: Demonstration of the terrain traversal capabilities of the policies
and their effect on the robot’s velocities when using a fine tuned policy.
The robot autonomously slows down upon approaching terrain so that it
can robustly traverse it. In general the policy shows accurate speed tracking
and reliable terrain traversal. The percentages are measuring the successful
trials over the 150 samples per terrain.
the robustness and precision of the policies. The robot
can locomote over many different real-world stair cases: 6
different real-world stair cases were successfully traversed,
each with different geometry. The robot can locomote both
down and up stairs. The robot can walk and run both
indoors and outdoors as well as transition from fast and
slow speeds onto the terrain. In Fig. 7 the bottom right
image demonstrates the robot running at 2 m/s while turning
on a path. Lastly the robot can jump onto and off of
boxes. We have tested approaching stairs at a variety of
speeds on hardware including at 0.8 m/s, 1.5 m/s and 2.0
m/s while successfully transitioning onto the terrain. On
the hardware, the resulting motions are smooth, natural,
and relatively quiet, especially on terrain like stairs where
other methods may slam their feet into the ground. The
hardware experiments also validate that the multi-camera
policy can be deployed in real world environments with
walls and trees and bushes without needing to simulate every
possible perceptive condition. Our results demonstrate that
this policy can be deployed to control a humanoid robot
in real world environments for dynamic and terrain aware
multi-skill locomotion.
E. Data Pipeline
Next, we can study the properties of our data pipeline
that feeds into the tracker and the generator. Table III shows
that our optimized reference trajectories in conjunction with
Motion Bricks achieve superior velocity tracking to that of


Fig. 7: Demonstration of the policy pair working in a variety of conditions. We demonstrate traversing a number of different stair cases that have unique
geometry indicating the policy’s capability to adjust to different terrain. Then we also show running and walking of the robot on flat ground both in straight
lines and while turning. We also demonstrate the robot jumping onto a variety of platforms including from a running start.
Velocity RMSE (m/s)
Vel. Command (vx)
Ours [95% CI]
Motion Bricks [95% CI]
(-1.0, -0.2]
0.484 [0.357, 0.598]
0.462 [0.346, 0.562]
(-0.2, +1.0]
0.230 [0.191, 0.271]
0.368 [0.308, 0.434]
(+1.0, +2.5]
0.442 [0.312, 0.563]
0.896 [0.813, 0.976]
TABLE III: Comparison between different motion clip generation methods
on flat ground. Entries that are statistically significant improvements are bold
and entries that have CI bounds overlapping other means are underlined.
Terrain Type
Both Cameras
Lower Only
Flat
100%
100%
Box
100 %
57.3 %
Stairs Up
82.7%
71.3%
Stairs Down
97.3%
88.0 %
TABLE IV: Comparison showing how the upper camera is affecting the
ability to traverse in-distribution terrain. Removing the upper camera hurts
the ability to traverse a given terrain by up to 43% as demonstrated with
the box terrain. The upper camera is critical for seeing the object ahead of
time so the policy can modulate its speed early.
Motion Bricks alone. Achieving accurate velocity tracking
is critical as these motion clips upper bound the velocity
tracking performance of the final policies since they are
trained to track these clips. Therefore any lost tracking
capabilities here can not be recovered with the current
pipeline. Although just using Motion Bricks would certainly
be the lower effort option, it would lead to significantly
worse tracking performance. We also investigated the use
of motion matching for the generation of offline clips and
found that it was able to achieve good velocity tracking
when given access to the same reference motions and dataset
but the motion matching took more than 7x the time to
compute a given clip, which translated to hours for the full
10,000 motion clip library, making it not a desirable path
forward. Additionally, the motion matching produced higher
jerk trajectories resulting in motions that appeared to be more
jittery.
F. Two Camera Ablation
We study the effect of having two cameras given that
many other policies use only a single camera. The upper
camera is pointed forward to allow the robot to see what
is coming while the lower camera is pointed down to see
the terrain immediately under its feet. Previous results have
used only the downward facing camera [10], [9] but our
work requires the robot to adjust its velocity before it
reaches the terrain since the robot can travel at faster speeds
(up to 2.5 m/s). We demonstrate that the upper camera is
a critical part of the architecture to enable this velocity
adjustment by training a generator with and without the upper
camera. In this experiment we choose to only use the original
pre-trained generator to reduce the number of confounding
variables. Table IV shows that there is a significant decrease
in capabilities with success rates dropping by up to 43%
with the upper camera removed. Looking at the trajectories
for the box terrain confirms that the vast majority of these
failures are caused by running into the box, and the success
rates drop with increased speed.
IV. CONCLUSION
We presented Generate, Track, Improve: a full pipeline for
human data optimization, motion clip creation, tracker train-
ing, motion generation, and finally an off policy RL loop for
the generator. The resulting policy pair enables a humanoid
robot to achieve multiple skills such as walking, running,
standing, jumping on and off of boxes, and traversing stairs,
all in the real world with perception in the loop. The policies
take in raw depth images from multiple cameras which allow
the robot to see the current obstacles and what is coming. The
RL fine tuning loop with AWR improves the mode selection
by up to 80 percentage points, and success rate by up to 25
percentage points. This allows the policy to adapt to out of
distribution tasks and geometries using a simple but effective
method.
The policies were demonstrated on real humanoid robots
both in lab settings and outdoors. The policies create mo-
tions that are human like, dynamic, and robust enough for
deployment. The robot is able to traverse long real world


stair cases, jump on, walk across, and jump off of boxes,
walk and run. The resulting policies showed a few different
skills but can be easily extended to many more skills, making
this architecture amenable to general purpose humanoids.
A. Limitations
Hand designed rewards are used in the RL fine tuning, and
although they are quite general, may not extend to every
possible motion. Using only depth information limits the
semantic information that a policy like this can use. For
example, it is possible that there are box shaped objects we
do not want to jump on and currently we have no way to
encode that. The data pipeline still required some hand tuning
of transition hyperparameters and choosing the human data
reference motions for the optimization is still done via either
a heuristic or a human. Both of these data pipeline limitations
need to be addressed before the method can truly scale to
any motion.
B. Future Work
Improving the search in the generator RL could not only
improve the quality of the motions but it could also lead to
new motions being generated, similar to the work in PARC
[7]. But finding an efficient and structured way to search will
be critical. Our proposed method could also be extended to
learn from real-world hardware data as well, allowing it to
improve from real deployments. To generate terrain aware
motions using a mimic style pipeline at scale we generally
use reference motions from human data, but, the data we
use does not have ground truth terrain information right
now and including objects and terrain in the dataset could
make the problem much more scalable. Developing better
methods for transitions and new models to generate terrain
aware motions offline will be critical here. Additionally,
folding these controllers into a navigation autonomy stack
and threading in safety/obstacle avoidance will be necessary
for further real world deployment.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, B. Zhang, T. Darrell, J. Malik, and
K. Sreenath, “Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement
learning,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi9579, Apr. 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.
adi9579
[2] K. Li, Z. Olkin, Y. Yue, and A. D. Ames, “CLF-RL: Control
Lyapunov Function Guided Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 3230–3237, Mar. 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11346966/
[3] J. Siekmann, Y. Godse, A. Fern, and J. Hurst, “Sim-to-Real
Learning of All Common Bipedal Gaits via Periodic Reward
Composition,”
Mar.
2021,
arXiv:2011.01387
[cs.RO].
[Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.01387
[4] Z. Olkin, W. D. Compton, R. M. Bena, and A. D. Ames,
“Chasing Autonomy: Dynamic Retargeting and Control Guided RL
for Performant and Controllable Humanoid Running,” 2026, version
Number: 1. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.25902
[5] Z.
Li,
X.
B.
Peng,
P.
Abbeel,
S.
Levine,
G.
Berseth,
and
K. Sreenath, “Reinforcement Learning for Versatile, Dynamic, and
Robust Bipedal Locomotion Control,” Jan. 2024, arXiv:2401.16889
[cs, eess]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16889
[6] Z. Wu et al., “Perceptive Humanoid Parkour: Chaining Dynamic
Human Skills via Motion Matching,” 2026, version Number: 2.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15827
[7] M. Xu, Y. Shi, K. Yin, and X. B. Peng, “PARC: Physics-
based Augmentation with Reinforcement Learning for Character
Controllers,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Special
Interest
Group
on
Computer
Graphics
and
Interactive
Techniques
Conference
Conference Papers, Aug. 2025, pp. 1–11, arXiv:2505.04002 [cs.GR].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04002
[8] Z. Zhuang, S. Yao, and H. Zhao, “Humanoid Parkour Learning,” Sep.
2024, arXiv:2406.10759 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2406.10759
[9] Y. Zhang et al., “RPL: Learning Robust Humanoid Perceptive
Locomotion on Challenging Terrains,” Aug. 2026, version Number:
2. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.03002
[10] W. D. Compton, Z. Olkin, and A. D. Ames, “Terrain Consistent
Reference-Guided RL for Humanoid Navigation Autonomy,” 2026,
version Number: 1. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.
15517
[11] J. Long et al., “Learning Humanoid Locomotion with Perceptive
Internal Model,” Nov. 2024, arXiv:2411.14386 [cs.RO]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.14386
[12] H. Wang et al., “BeamDojo: Learning Agile Humanoid Locomotion
on Sparse Footholds,” Apr. 2025, arXiv:2502.10363 [cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10363
[13] M. Dai, W. D. Compton, J. Li, L. Yang, and A. D. Ames, “Walk
the PLANC: Physics-Guided RL for Agile Humanoid Locomotion
on Constrained Footholds,” 2026, version Number: 1. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06286
[14] C.
Crismariu
and
R.
K.
Cosner,
“MARCH:
Model-Assisted
Reinforcement Learning for the Perceptive Control of Humanoids
over Sparse Footholds,” 2026, version Number: 1. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.10288
[15] Z. Luo et al., “SONIC: Supersizing Motion Tracking for Natural
Humanoid Whole-Body Control,” Science Robotics, vol. 11, no.
117, p. eaed4592, Aug. 2026, arXiv:2511.07820 [cs.RO]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.07820
[16] K. Yin et al., “UniTracker: Learning Universal Whole-Body Motion
Tracker for Humanoid Robots,” Sep. 2025, arXiv:2507.07356 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07356
[17] N. Rudin, J. He, J. Aurand, and M. Hutter, “Parkour in the
Wild: Learning a General and Extensible Agile Locomotion Policy
Using Multi-expert Distillation and RL Fine-tuning,” May 2025,
arXiv:2505.11164 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.
11164
[18] X. Huang et al., “Diffuse-CLoC: Guided Diffusion for Physics-based
Character Look-ahead Control,” 2025, version Number: 3. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.11801
[19] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to
Walk in Minutes Using Massively Parallel Deep Reinforcement
Learning,” Aug. 2022, arXiv:2109.11978 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.11978
[20] J.
Schulman,
F.
Wolski,
P.
Dhariwal,
A.
Radford,
and
O.
Klimov,
“Proximal
Policy
Optimization
Algorithms,”
Aug.
2017,
arXiv:1707.06347
[cs.LG].
[Online].
Available:
http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347
[21] X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and M. v. d. Panne, “DeepMimic:
Example-Guided Deep Reinforcement Learning of Physics-Based
Character Skills,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 1–14, Aug. 2018, arXiv:1804.02717 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02717
[22] Q. Liao, T. E. Truong, X. Huang, G. Tevet, K. Sreenath, and C. K.
Liu, “BeyondMimic: From Motion Tracking to Versatile Humanoid
Control via Guided Diffusion,” Aug. 2025, arXiv:2508.08241 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08241
[23] J. P. Sleiman et al., “ZEST: Zero-shot Embodied Skill Transfer for
Athletic Robot Control,” Jan. 2026, arXiv:2602.00401 [cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00401
[24] L.
Yang
et
al.,
“OmniRetarget:
Interaction-Preserving
Data
Generation
for
Humanoid
Whole-Body
Loco-Manipulation
and
Scene Interaction,” 2025, version Number: 3. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.26633
[25] W.
Xie
et
al.,
“KungfuBot:
Physics-Based
Humanoid
Whole-
Body Control for Learning Highly-Dynamic Skills,” Jun. 2025,
arXiv:2506.12851 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
12851
[26] T. He et al., “ASAP: Aligning Simulation and Real-World Physics


for Learning Agile Humanoid Whole-Body Skills,” Apr. 2025,
arXiv:2502.01143 [cs].
[27] M. Ji et al., “ExBody2: Advanced Expressive Humanoid Whole-Body
Control,” Mar. 2025, arXiv:2412.13196 [cs.RO]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13196
[28] H. J. Lee, S. Hong, and S. Kim, “Integrating Model-Based Footstep
Planning with Model-Free Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic
Legged Locomotion,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates: IEEE, Oct. 2024, pp. 11 248–11 255. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10801468/
[29] K. Green, Y. Godse, J. Dao, R. L. Hatton, A. Fern, and J. Hurst,
“Learning
Spring
Mass
Locomotion:
Guiding
Policies
with
a
Reduced-Order Model,” Mar. 2021, arXiv:2010.11234 [cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11234
[30] R. Batke et al., “Optimizing Bipedal Maneuvers of Single Rigid-Body
Models for Reinforcement Learning,” Jul. 2022, arXiv:2207.04163
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.04163
[31] S. A. Esteban et al., “Shooting for Contact: Contact-Implicit Multiple
Shooting for Dynamic Motion Retargeting,” Aug. 2026, version
Number: 1. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.03116
[32] Z. Li et al., “Reinforcement Learning for Robust Parameterized
Locomotion Control of Bipedal Robots,” in 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
Xi’an, China:
IEEE,
May
2021,
pp.
2811–2817.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9560769/
[33] F. Liu et al., “Opt2Skill: Imitating Dynamically-feasible Whole-Body
Trajectories for Versatile Humanoid Loco-Manipulation,” Oct. 2025,
arXiv:2409.20514 [cs].
[34] R. Grandia et al., “Design and Control of a Bipedal Robotic
Character,”
in
Robotics:
Science
and
Systems
XX.
Robotics:
Science and Systems Foundation, Jul. 2024. [Online]. Available:
http://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss20/p103.pdf
[35] Y. Gu et al., “Evolution of humanoid locomotion control,” Science
RoboticS, 2026.
[36] Z. Zhang et al., “Learning Whole-Body Humanoid Locomotion
via
Motion
Generation
and
Motion
Tracking,”
Jul.
2026,
arXiv:2604.17335 [cs.RO]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2604.17335
[37] W. Sun et al., “Learning Perceptive Humanoid Locomotion over
Challenging Terrain,” Apr. 2025, arXiv:2503.00692 [cs.RO]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.00692
[38] T. Miki, L. Wellhausen, R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, T. Homberger, and
M. Hutter, “Elevation Mapping for Locomotion and Navigation using
GPU,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS).
Kyoto, Japan: IEEE, Oct. 2022, pp.
2273–2280. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9981507/
[39] Physical Intelligence et al., “π∗
0.6: A VLA that learns from
experience,” 2025, version Number: 2. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2511.14759
[40] K. Chen et al., “πRL: Online RL fine-tuning for flow-based
vision-language-action models,” 2025, version Number: 3. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25889
[41] Z. Gu et al., “REFINE-DP: Diffusion Policy Fine-tuning for Humanoid
Loco-manipulation via Reinforcement Learning,” Jul. 2026, version
Number: 3.
[42] L. Ankile, Z. Jiang, R. Duan, G. Shi, P. Abbeel, and A. Nagabandi,
“Residual Off-Policy RL for Finetuning Behavior Cloning Policies,”
Sep. 2025, arXiv:2509.19301 [cs.RO]. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2509.19301
[43] A. Z. Ren et al., “Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization,” Dec. 2024,
arXiv:2409.00588 [cs.RO]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2409.00588
[44] A. Wagenmaker et al., “Steering Your Diffusion Policy with Latent
Space Reinforcement Learning,” 2025, version Number: 2. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15799
[45] E. Su, T. Westenbroek, A. Nagabandi, and A. Gupta, “RFS:
Reinforcement Learning with Residual Flow Steering for Dexterous
Manipulation,”
Feb.
2026,
arXiv:2602.01789
[cs.RO].
[Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2602.01789
[46] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow
Matching for Generative Modeling,” Feb. 2023, arXiv:2210.02747
[cs.LG]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02747
[47] T.
Wang
et
al.,
“MotionBricks:
Scalable
Real-Time
Motions
with Modular Latent Generative Model and Smart Primitives,”
Apr. 2026, arXiv:2604.24833 [cs.RO]. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2604.24833
[48] X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine, “Advantage-Weighted
Regression: Simple and Scalable Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning,”
Oct. 2019, arXiv:1910.00177 [cs.LG].
[49] B.
Studio,
“BONES-SEED,”
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/bones-studio/seed
[50] E.
Todorov,
T.
Erez,
and
Y.
Tassa,
“MuJoCo:
A
physics
engine for model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
Vilamoura-Algarve,
Portugal: IEEE, Oct. 2012, pp. 5026–5033. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6386109/
[51] NVIDIA
et
al.,
“Isaac
Lab:
A
GPU-Accelerated
Simulation
Framework
for
Multi-Modal
Robot
Learning,”
Nov.
2025,
arXiv:2511.04831 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.
04831
[52] C. Schwarke, M. Mittal, N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, and M. Hutter,
“RSL-RL: A Learning Library for Robotics Research,” Sep. 2025,
arXiv:2509.10771 [cs.RO].
[53] S. Emmons, B. Eysenbach, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine, “RVS: WHAT
IS ESSENTIAL FOR OFFLINE RL VIA SUPERVISED LEARN-
ING?” 2022.
V. APPENDIX
A. CLF-RL
We use CLF-RL [2] for our motion tracking rewards.
A CLF nominally up-weights tracking of velocity terms
but we found in practice that since the velocity can be
higher variance than the position this is not always desirable.
Therefore we choose to insert a scaling term S that re-scales
the CLF weights without violating its theoretical properties.
Proposition 1: Consider the outputs η ordered so that
Aη = blkdiag(A1, . . . , An), Bη = blkdiag(B1, . . . , Bn)
with Ai =
0
1
0
0

, Bi =
0
1

. Further, let Q and R be
diagonal and positive definite, and let P be the stabiliz-
ing solution of the CARE for (Aη, Bη, Q, R). Let S =
diag(a1, b1, . . . , an, bn) with ai, bi > 0. Under the assump-
tions of Prop. 1 of [2], ¯V (η) = η⊤SPSη is an exponentially
stabilizing CLF.
Proof:
Since Aη, Bη, Q, R are block diagonal by
output, the CARE decouples and P = blkdiag(P1, . . . , Pn),
where Pi solves
A⊤
i Pi + PiAi −PiBir−1
i
B⊤
i Pi + Qi = 0,
(4)
Note SPS = blkdiag(SiPiSi) with Si = diag(ai, bi), so
it suffices to examine one output. Let ci = ai/bi. Then
SiAiS−1
i
= ciAi and S−1
i
Bi = Bib−1
i , and since Si is
symmetric, S−1
i
A⊤
i Si = ciA⊤
i . With ¯Pi = SiPiSi,
A⊤
i ¯Pi + ¯PiAi = ci Si(A⊤
i Pi + PiAi)Si
(5)
= ¯PiBi
 c−1
i b2
i ri
−1B⊤
i ¯Pi −ci SiQiSi, (6)
using (4). Hence ¯Pi solves the CARE for (Ai, Bi, ¯Qi, ¯ri)
with
¯Qi = ciSiQiSi
¯ri = b3
i
ai ri > 0.
(7)
Because ¯Qi ≻0, the CARE has a positive definite solution,
which is stabilizing; as ¯Pi ≻0, it is that solution. Thus
SPS is the CARE solution for (Aη, Bη, ¯Q, ¯R) with ¯Q =
blkdiag( ¯Qi), ¯R = diag(¯ri), and Prop. 1 of [2] applies with
(Q, R) replaced by ( ¯Q, ¯R).
