Title: DyaDiT: A Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer for Socially Favorable Dyadic Gesture Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23165v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Feb 2026 02:07:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# DyaDiT: A Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer for Socially Favorable Dyadic Gesture Generation 

## Yichen Peng 1,2 Jyun-Ting Song 2 Siyeol Jung 2,3 Ruofan Liu 1 Haiyang Liu 4,5 

## Xuangeng Chu 4,5 Ruicong Liu 4,5 Erwin Wu 1,4 Hideki Koike 1 Kris Kitani 21Institute of Science Tokyo 2Carnegie Mellon Unversity 

> 3

## UNIST 4Shanda AI Research Tokyo 5The University of Tokyo 

peng.y.ag@m.titech.ac.jp Family 

Friend 

Stranger 

Dating Partner 

DyaDit  Relationship Token 

> (Stranger, Friends, etc.)

Personality Scores Token 

> (Agreebleness, Conscientiousness, etc.)

Dyadic 

Audio 

Partner’s 

Gesture 

Output 

Input 

Seed Pose  𝑓 1 𝑓 50  𝑓 100  … … 𝑓 n

Figure 1. DyaDiT generates socially aware conversational gestures from dyadic audio, conditioned on social factors such as relationship and personality traits, achieving natural and contextually appropriate reactions that outperform prior methods in both quantitative and user evaluations. 

## Abstract 

Generating realistic conversational gestures are essen-tial for achieving natural, socially engaging interactions with digital humans. However, existing methods typically map a single audio stream to a single speaker’s motion, without considering social context or modeling the mu-tual dynamics between two people engaging in conversa-tion. We present DyaDiT, a multi-modal diffusion trans-former that generates contextually appropriate human mo-tion from dyadic audio signals. Trained on Seamless In-teraction Dataset [1], DyaDiT takes dyadic audio with op-tional social-context tokens to produce context-appropriate motion. It fuses information from both speakers to capture 

1

> arXiv:2602.23165v1 [cs.CV] 26 Feb 2026

interaction dynamics, uses a motion dictionary to encode motion priors, and can optionally utilize the conversational partner’s gestures to produce more responsive motion. We evaluate DyaDiT on standard motion generation metrics and conduct quantitative user studies, demonstrating that it not only surpasses existing methods on objective metrics but is also strongly preferred by users, highlighting its ro-bustness and socially favorable motion generation. Code and models will be released upon acceptance. 

## 1. Introduction 

Building synthetic agents (also known as digital humans, AI agents, avatars or androids) that can interact naturally with people, is essential for the future of human–computer interfaces. Recent language models such as GPT-4.5 [33] and LLaMA-3.1 [12] already demonstrate impressive con-versational ability, and many users even feel as if they are speaking with another person [15]. However, currently this illusion still remains confined to a text window. In reality, human interaction involves more than just spoken words. People gesture, respond to each other, and express subtle so-cial cues through body motion. In order for humans to truly feel that a synthetic agent is interactive, the agent must ac-company its speech with gestures that evolve naturally with the conversation. However, generating such gestures is challenging. They are strongly shaped by social factors such as personality, the relationship between speakers, and their conversational roles. These cues influence how people move, how they react, and how they coordinate with one another, yet most existing gesture generation models do not explicitly model them [26, 27, 42]. As a result, their gestures often appear generic or fake. In addition to social context, dyadic con-versation, which happens between two interacting individ-uals, exhibits speech dynamics that are difficult for gesture generation models to handle. Two people can speak at the same time, interrupt one another, or rapidly switch between speaking and listening [8, 28]. Their audio streams merge together, making it difficult to separate who is speaking and who is responding [19, 30, 39]. Most existing dyadic ges-ture generation models [29, 32], however, simply fuse the two speech streams into one, making the contribution of each speaker blurry and therefore weakening the correspon-dence between the generated gestures and the underlying interaction. To tackle these limitations, we introduce DyaDiT, a dif-fusion based transformer that generates socially aware ges-tures from dyadic audio. Unlike previous work [10, 22, 23, 36] that focuses only on the alignment between audio and generated motion, DyaDiT conditions its generation on ex-plicit social cues such as relationship and personality. Fur-thermore, in order to address the strong entanglement of two overlapping audio streams during conversation, we propose Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA), a simple yet effective module that disambiguates the two audio streams, resulting in a cleaner audio representation for better gesture generation. Lastly, since human motion in a dyadic setting is often affected by the partner’s gestures, DyaDiT can op-tionally take the partner’s movements as an additional input, allowing the model to generate gestures that are more coor-dinated, responsive, and natural. Our experiments show that DyaDiT consistently outper-forms existing dyadic gesture generation methods across standard quantitative metrics, achieving clear improve-ments in gesture quality and distribution alignment. In ad-dition, we conduct extensive user studies to assess human perceptual preference. The results show that participants strongly favor gestures generated by DyaDiT, indicating that our generated motion appears more socially aware and better suited for real conversational settings. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: • We propose DyaDiT, a diffusion transformer (DiT) that generates social context aware gestures in dyadic conver-sations. • We introduce an Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA) module that reduces interference between two individual’s audio streams, enabling a cleaner audio rep-resentation for better gesture generation in dyadic conver-sation. • Through extensive quantitative evaluations and user stud-ies, we show that DyaDiT consistently outperforms exist-ing methods on standard metrics and is preferred by users in terms of perceived realism and social consistency. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Co-Speech Gesture Generation 

Co-speech gesture generation focuses on synthesizing body movements aligned with a single speaker’s speech. Early approaches formulate gesture generation as a translation problem from multimodal speech cues, combining text, audio, and speaker identity through recurrent or adver-sarial models, such as the trimodal framework of Yoon et al. [49], which treated gesture generation as a trans-lation problem, combining speech transcripts, audio, and speaker identity through an adversarial recurrent frame-work. Liu et al. [22] introduced the BEAT dataset and CaMN, a cascaded multimodal adversarial network capable of generating synchronized body and hand gestures. Other works, such as EMAGE [23], TalkSHOW [47], MECo [5], etc. [11, 21, 24, 34, 46] enhanced realism by disentangling rhythmic and semantic motion features or integrating dis-crete latent spaces via VQ-VAEs. Although these advances are notable, most of them fo-cuses on single-speaker co-speech gestures and overlooks 2Audio  

> Token
> 𝑞

Cross -Attention 

Cross -Attention   

> Orthogonalization
> 𝑘 ,𝑣
> 𝑘 ,𝑣
> 𝑞
> Learable Gate
> Other Audio
> Self’s Audio
> Motion
> Dictionary

…

> +
> Other Audio
> Motion Style

Motion Dictionary            

> 𝑓 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =[𝑚 0,𝑚 1…𝑚 𝑛 ]𝐷𝑖𝑐𝑡 𝑛 =[𝑑 0,𝑑 1…𝑑 𝑛 ]

Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA)  

> Self -Attention
> Cross -Attention
> MLP  ×4

…  

> DiTBlocks
> 𝑘 ,𝑣

t

> Fi LM
> Fi LM
> Fi LM
> VQ -Decoder

LayerNorm                  

> 𝑘 ,𝑣
> DIT Block
> 𝑞 ,𝑘 ,𝑣
> [𝑏𝑠 ,𝑇 ,𝐽 ]
> [𝑏𝑠 ,𝑇 /4,𝑑 ]Noise Pose Latent
> Decoded Pose Seqence
> [𝑏𝑠 ,𝑇 /4,𝑑 ]
> Audio ,Self’s Motion ,Relationship ,
> and Personality Scores Tokens
> Relationship ,Personality Scores
> and Time Emb.

DyaDiT          

> 𝑎 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
> 𝑎 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟
> 𝑎 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ⊥=𝑎 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 −𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑗 𝑎 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 (𝑎 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 )
> 𝑑 0𝑑 1𝑑 2𝑑 𝑛

CA   

> 𝑝 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡 𝑓 𝑝𝑠 𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑑𝑖𝑜

(a) 

(b)  (c) Figure 2. Overview of DyaDiT. DyaDiT conditions on multiple input modalities, including audio, partner motion, relationship type, and personality scores. It employs an Audio Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA) module to obtain cleaner audio representations and a motion dictionary to guide style aware gesture generation. 

the interactive nature of human communication. More com-plex settings such as dyadic gesture generation, which re-quire modeling both participants’ behaviors and their inter-personal dynamics, remain largely unexplored. 

2.2. Dyadic Gesture and Reaction Generation 

Unlike co-speech gesture synthesis, dyadic gesture gener-ation must model the coordinated behavior between two participants, including interpersonal timing, mutual atten-tion, and responsiveness. Most prior works in this do-main stem from facial reaction generation (FRG), where the goal is to predict non-deterministic listener facial re-sponses to a speaker’s behavior [16, 25–27, 31, 38, 50]. Al-though FRG provides a basis for modeling two-person in-teractions, it primarily focuses only on facial or head move-ments rather than full-body gestures. Due to this limita-tion, several recent works have begun exploring body ges-ture generation in dyadic settings. A few efforts such as Au-dio2Photoreal [32], ConvoFusion [29], and TAG2G [9] ex-tend single-speaker frameworks to two-party settings. Yet, these models often either (1) overlook the social context be-tween the two individuals or (2) treat dyadic audio as a sin-gle blended signal without explicitly modeling cross-person dynamics, which often leads to ambiguity in the roles and interaction patterns presented to the model. These limita-tions highlight the need for explicit feature disentanglement and better support for socially contextual reasoning. 

2.3. Diffusion-based Gesture Generation 

Diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative tools for human motion due to their ability to model multi-modal and many-to-many distributions. Several works have adapted diffusion frameworks originally designed for text-conditioned motion generation, such as MotionDiffuse [52], FineMoGen [51], and MDM [41], etc. [3, 6, 37, 40], to the speech–gesture domain. Alexanderson et al. [2] re-formulated DiffWave for co-speech gestures, while Zhu et al. [55] proposed DiffGesture, integrating noisy gesture se-quences with contextual embeddings for temporal model-ing. DiffuseStyleGesture+ [45] further introduced condi-tioning on audio, text, style, and seed gestures, leveraging transformer-based denoising with attention control. Other works, such as UnifiedGesture [44], LivelySpeaker [53], and AMUSE [7], emphasized semantic and rhythmic con-sistency, disentangling emotional and stylistic latent factors. Considering the success of diffusion-based approaches in gesture generation, and the inherently nondeterministic na-ture of dyadic conversation, we build our method upon a diffusion model to better capture the variability and dynam-ics present in two-person interactions. 3Interrupting         

> Being Interrupted
> Yeah, so I think ,I mean, that’s really great …….
> uh you know here in florida i feel like you know…..

Figure 3. ORCA reduces ambiguity between the two audio streams, allowing DyaDiT to generate realistic motion even when one person interrupts the other during the conversation. The example demonstrates the generated motions adjusts naturally as the conversation shifts. 

## 3. DyaDiT 

We introduce DyaDiT , a diffusion transformer (DiT) with multi-modal input for dyadic gesture generation. Given the conversational audio streams from two individuals (denoted as self and other ), our objective is to generate plausible upper-body gestures for the other speaker in accordance with the conversational context. To further enhance the re-alism of the generated gestures, DyaDiT optionally incor-porates the relationship, personality traits, and gesture se-quence of self as auxiliary conditioning signals during in-ference. We train our model on a subset of the Seamless Interaction dataset [1], with dataset specifications and pre-processing procedures detailed in Section 3.1. An overview of the full architecture is shown in Fig. 2. Details of the Audio Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA) module are provided in Section 3.3, while the motion dictionary and motion tokenizer are presented in Sections 3.4 and 3.5, re-spectively. 

3.1. Seamless Interaction Dataset 

The Seamless Interaction dataset [1] is a large-scale corpus of dyadic conversation containing synchronized audio, full-body motion, and facial expressions. In this work, we use a curated subset of 3,000 clips (approximately 182 hours) from the dataset’s naturalistic scenario collection, which contains rich and spontaneous dyadic conversations suited for modeling conversational gestures. We focus on generat-ing upper-body gestures, represented as g ∈ RT ×J×6 using the 6D rotation representation [54], where J denotes the number of upper-body joints. In addition to motion data, we incorporate two high level social annotations provided in the dataset: a relationship type label frs ∈ { 0, 1}4 in-dicating whether the speakers are friends, strangers, family members, or dating partners; and a personality score vector 

fps ∈ R5 that quantifies five major personality traits, which are extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroti-cism, and openness. For audio inputs, we extract the dyadic speech signals from both individuals and process them with a pretrained Wav2Vec2 encoder [4] to obtain audio feature embeddings for conditioning in our model. 

3.2. DiT Backbone 

Our model adopts a diffusion transformer (DiT) backbone that follows the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) [14] framework. The network takes a noisy latent pose xt and predicts the added Gaussian noise according to time step t, ϵθ (xt, t, c) conditioned on multiple contextual inputs c, where c = ( ORCA (aself , a other ), p self , f relat , f ps )

including audio, partner’s motion, relationship type, and personality scores. The training objective follows the stan-dard ϵ-prediction loss: 

Ldiff = Ex0,t, ϵ

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt, t, c)∥22

i

, (1) where xt = √¯αtx0 + √1 − ¯αtϵ.As shown in Figure 2(a), each DiT block consists of a self-attention layer for modeling temporal dependencies 4within the latent pose sequence and a cross-attention layer for integrating contextual information from multimodal cues. In addition, the relationship and personality embed-dings are injected through both FiLM-based [35] modula-tion and cross-attention, enabling DyaDiT to jointly capture social attributes and individual expressive styles in gesture generation. 

3.3. Audio Orthogonalization Cross Attention (ORCA) 

To effectively capture conversational dynamics between two speakers, we introduce a orthogonalization cross at-tention module for audio fusion (Figure 2(b)). Given the audio features from both speakers aself and aother , encoded by Wav2Vec2, our goal is to separate redundant factors while aligning complementary information into a joint rep-resentation. We first apply an orthogonalization process to filter out redundant components between the two audio streams: 

a⊥ 

> self

= aself − Proj aother (aself ), (2) where Proj aother (·) denotes the projection of the self audio feature aself onto the subspace of the other’s audio fea-ture. This operation enforces complementary conditioning and reduces correlated information across dyadic audio. Subsequently, we employ two symmetric cross-attention modules to achieve bidirectional information exchange. The first module uses aother as query and attends to a⊥

> self

,capturing the speaker’s response to the partner’s utterance. Conversely, the second module takes a⊥ 

> self

as query and at-tends to aother , modeling the listener’s reactive cues. The outputs of the two cross-attention streams are then adap-tively fused through a learnable gating mechanism: 

faudio = σ(Wg )·hself →other +(1 −σ(Wg )) ·hother →self , (3) where σ(·) is a sigmoid function and Wg is a learnable gate parameter. The resulting fused token faudio is used as the final au-dio conditioning input to the DyaDiT, providing a plausible acoustic embedding that reflects both interlocutors’ vocal behaviors. As shown in Figure 3, with ORCA, DyaDiT have the capability to generate either speaker or listener gestures. 

3.4. Motion Dictionary (MD) 

Inspired by prior work LIA [43] which learns a set of or-thogonal motion-directions by enforcing orthonormality at initialization, we similarly introduce a learnable orthogonal motion dictionary to modulate the partner’s audio feature 

aother according to the current style motion. The motion dictionary is a module designed to incorporate motion style conditioning when user requires motion style control. As shown in Figure 2(c), it consists of a set of learnable mo-tion bases {d0, d 1, . . . , d n} that encode representative ges-ture primitives. During training, we include ground truth motion style features fmotion = [ m0, m 1, . . . , m n] to guide the model in learning style-aware correspondences between audio cues and motion patterns. Given the other-speaker audio feature aother , the dictio-nary is integrated through a cross-attention (CA) operation followed by a weighted combination with the motion bases: 

a′ 

> other

= CA( aother ,

> n

X

> k=0

mkdk) + aother , (4) where Dict = [ d0, d 1, . . . , d n] and mk denotes the style-dependent modulation weight derived from fmotion .At inference, the motion dictionary can be optionally ac-tivated. With classifier-free guidance (CFG) [13], the style conditioning can be strengthened to generate gestures with distinct stylistic patterns, or completely dropped to produce an unconditional, style-agnostic motion driven purely by the learned audio–motion prior. 

3.5. Motion Tokenizer 

Instead of directly training our DiT model using the raw gesture sequences x′ 

> 0

∈ RT ×J , we first train a VQ-VAE to discretize the continuous motion space into compact latent representations. Our implementation follows the residual vector quantization framework introduced in prior works [18], where multiple codebooks are cascaded to pro-gressively refine quantization errors. Specifically, we adopt a residual VQ-VAE with a residual length of 4, utilizing four hierarchical codebooks to capture progressively finer-grained motion details. In addition, to reduce temporal re-dundancy, we downsample the input gesture sequence by a factor of 4 using 1D convolution layers in the encoder, resulting in one latent token for every four frames. Dur-ing training of DyaDiT, the VQ-VAE encoder compresses gesture sequences into a sequence of quantized tokens, 

x′ 

> t

∈ RT / 4×d, where d = 64 in our experiment. At in-ference time, the VQ-VAE decoder then reconstructs con-tinuous motions from the generated quantized embeddings. Note that since our diffusion model operates directly in the latent space, the encoder is not used during inference, and the decoder is not used during training. This hierarchical and temporally compact quantization allows the diffusion model to capture long-range dependencies while maintain-ing high-fidelity motion reconstruction. 

## 4. Experiments 

We evaluate the effectiveness of DyaDiT for dyadic ges-ture generation through both quantitative and qualitative experiments. For the quantitative evaluation, we compute 5Method FD Diversity Sta. ↓ Kine. ↓ Sta. ↑ Kine. ↑                                     

> GT --28.42 1.97 GT Random 14.94 3.74 33.85 2.05 ConvoFusion [29] 9.22 1.74 18.33 1.10 Audio2PhotoReal [20] 8.77 1.84 19.35 1.05 DyaDiT (w/o ORCA) 7.32 1.79 23.57 1.24 DyaDiT (w/o MD) 6.88 1.75 18.34 1.29 DyaDiT (Uncond) 7.40 1.63 21.65 1.16 DyaDiT (Random) 8.24 1.53 21.94 1.43 DyaDiT 6.40 1.37 27.46 1.38 Table 1. Quantitative comparison of DyaDiT and baselines in terms of Fr´ echet Distance (FD) and Diversity. Lower FD indicates higher realism, and higher diversity values indicate more varied motion generation.

the Fr´ echet Distance (FD) and Diversity metrics to com-pare DyaDiT with two existing dyadic gesture generation models, ConvoFusion [29] and Audio2PhotoReal [32]. In addition, we report scores with respect to the ground truth gestures, which serve as a reference for the underlying mo-tion distribution in the dataset. For the qualitative evalua-tion, we conduct a user preference study to evaluate both the overall perceived quality of the generated gestures and their alignment with the social relationship and personality characteristics. 

4.1. Evaluation Metrics 

Following prior works on gesture generation [2, 3, 32], we adopt both distribution and diversity metrics for quantita-tive evaluation. Specifically, we report the Fr´ echet Distance 

(FD) to measure the realism of generated motions, Diver-sity [20] to quantify motion variability across samples For reference, we also compute all metrics on ground truth sam-ples from the Seamless Interaction dataset[1] to provide as baseline for comparison. Below, we provide the definitions of the quantitative metrics used in our evaluation. • FD (Static) measures the pose realism for individual frames in the pose space R3×j , where j=43 (including finger joints). • FD (Kinetic) evaluates the realism of temporal dynamics by computing the FD over gesture velocities in RT ×3×j ,where T =300 frames in our experiments. • Diversity (Static) quantifies the variation of single-frame poses by computing the average mean squared error (MSE) between clips. • Diversity (Kinetic) measures temporal motion diversity by averaging the pairwise velocity differences across gen-erated gesture sequences. 

4.2. Baseline Methods 

We compare DyaDiT with two representative dyadic ges-ture generation models: • ConvoFusion [29] implement a diffusion-based frame-work with multiple layers of cross-attention to fuse mul-timodal inputs, including audio and visual features. For a fair comparison, we retrain their model on our training subset of the Seamless Interaction Dataset[1] to match our experimental domain and output representation. • Audio2PhotoReal [32] is a full-body gesture generation model that jointly synthesizes body and facial motion. We extract and adapt only the body gesture generation branch for comparison. Specifically, the model first pre-dicts keyframe poses from audio using a causal trans-former, and then employs a diffusion transformer to inter-polate between keyframes to produce temporally coherent motion sequences. Likewise, we retrain the model on our dataset to ensure domain consistency with our evaluation study setup. During inference, both methods use a DDIM scheduler with 50 denoising steps (CFG = 2) to generate 300-frame gesture sequences (10 seconds). 

4.3. Quantitative Results 

The quantitative comparison between DyaDiT and the baseline models is shown in Table 1. For interpretability, the 

GT diversity reflects the dataset’s upper bound, while the 

GT Random FD serves as its lower bound. Across all met-rics, DyaDiT consistently outperforms existing baselines, achieving substantially lower FD(static) and FD(kinetic) 

scores while preserving high motion diversity. These re-sults demonstrate that the proposed social-context-aware DiT framework is more effective than the multi-branch fu-sion design in ConvoFusion [29] and the keyframe interpo-lation approach used in Audio2PhotoReal [20]. 

4.4. Ablation Studies 

We further conduct several ablation studies to analyze how different components and conditioning signals contribute to DyaDiT’s performance. Below, we explicitly explain the difference between each variant. • DyaDiT (w/o ORCA) removes the ORCA module and directly concatenate the raw dyadic audio features. • DyaDiT (w/o MD) removes the motion dictionary. • DyaDiT (Uncond) generates gestures without any condi-tioning. • DyaDiT (Random) performs inference with randomly assigned relationship and personality labels. As expected, we observe that removing the ORCA mod-ule leads to a noticeable degradation in FD performance, confirming its contribution to motion realism. Likewise, re-moving the Motion Dictionary also reduces overall perfor-mance, especially in Diversity (Static) , which drops by 9.12, 6Ground Truth             

> DyaDiT
> Convo Fusion
> Audio2PR
> but … I kind of firmly believe …that inherently humans are fluid personality … and … circums tances Figure 4. Qualitative Results. Comparison of visualization results between DyaDiT ,ConvoFusion [29], and Audio2PhotoReal [3]. The gestures generated by DyaDiT exhibit higher diversity and greater realism compared to the other methods.

suggesting that the learned motion bases play an important role in encouraging style variation. In addition, we observe that DyaDiT outperforms both DyaDiT (Uncond) and DyaDiT (Random) in terms of gen-eration quality. This demonstrates that social context is es-sential for producing more realistic gesture generation. Fur-thermore, we find that the Diversity (Static) metric drops by around 6 points when social context is removed or ran-domly assigned. We believe this is because the audio signal is positively correlated with both relationship and personal-ity traits, and mismatched or missing social context leads to a more restricted motion distribution. Lastly, we observe that DyaDiT (Uncond) does not ex-hibit higher diversity than the fully conditioned DyaDiT model. We believe this is due to the nature of dyadic con-versations, where a substantial portion of the data consists of listener behavior, which naturally shows less variation in both static and kinetic gestures compared to speaker behav-ior. As a result, additional conditioning signals help to guide the model to produce a wider spread of gesture variations, leading to greater overall diversity. 

## 5. User Study 

We conduct an A/B preference study with sixteen partici-pants to assess user preference on human motion in dyadic conversation settings. We compare our method with Con-voFusion [29] as well as with ground truth motion. The user study evaluates three aspects of the generated ges-tures: overall quality, relationship consistency, and person-ality consistency. Participants are shown paired clips and select their preferred gesture sequence, with the video pairs presented in randomized order to avoid ordering bias. An example video pair is shown in Figure 6. We randomly selected 56 ten-second sequences from the validation set of the Seamless Interaction dataset to conduct the experiment. Below we show sample questions presented to the participants in each section. • overall quality : “Which gesture of the orange character looks more human-like?” 

• relationship consistency : “Which pair seems more likely to be friends (or strangers, or family members, or dating partners)?” 

• personality consistency : “Which gesture better reflects the personality trait agreeable (or conscientious, or ex-traverted, or neurotic)?” 

For each video pair, participants were asked to provide both their preference and their confidence level (strongly or slightly). For the full questionnaire and interface design used in the experiment, please refer to the supplementary material. As shown in Figure 7, DyaDiT achieves no-tably higher user preference scores than ConvoFusion [29], and interestingly, even slightly outperforms the ground truth gestures from the Seamless Interaction dataset. Specifi-cally, DyaDiT is preferred by 73.9%, 69.8%, and 66.7% of 7Agreebleness      

> Conscientiousness
> Extraversion
> Openness
> Neutral
> Neuroticism
> Seed Pose 60 120 180 240 Frames

Figure 5. Visualization results under different personality score conditionings. All samples are generated using classifier-free guidance with CFG = 2.5. Conversation A  Conversation B 

> Partner
> Generated Agent

Figure 6. Example video pairs used in the user study for evaluating participant preference in conversational gesture generation. 

participants in the overall gesture quality, relationship con-sistency, and personality consistency sections, respectively. These results demonstrate that DyaDiT not only produces higher-quality gestures, but also generates motions that are more socially appropriate in dyadic conversational settings. Furthermore, our generated gestures are preferred over the ground-truth gestures by 1% and 1.7% in the two compari-son settings. We hypothesize this is mainly because (1) the ground-truth motion data occasionally contains jittering ar-tifacts, whereas the diffusion process implicitly regularizes 43.1% 

> 9.2%

User Preference Results  

> Overall Quality Relationship
> Consistancy
> Ours vs.
> Convofusion
> Strongly pref. DyaDiT
> Slightly pref. DyaDiT
> Strongly pref. Others
> Slightly pref. Others
> 36.7%
> Personality
> Consistancy
> Ours vs. GT
> 16.9%
> 30.8%
> 38.4%
> 16.4%
> 13.8%
> 31.4%
> 30.0%
> 12.5%
> 20.8%
> 18.3%
> 30.0%
> 26.7%
> 25.0%
> 23.1%
> 25.9% 24.1%
> 26.9%

Figure 7. A/B subjective evaluation percentages comparing our method with ConvoFusion[29] and with ground truth. Participants preferred our generated motion due to its more natural and socially aware conversational behavior. 

motion and produces smoother, more temporally consistent gestures; and (2) conditioning on social context encourage the model to generate slightly more expressive or exagger-ated motions, which, although less common in real interac-tions, tend to be more visually engaging to our participants. Lastly, It is worth noting that we do not compare our gener-ated gestures with the ground truth in the personality con-sistency section. This is because the personality annotations in the dataset are provided as continuous values rather than discrete categories, making it difficult for participants to re-liably judge whether a gesture aligns more strongly with a specific personality trait. 

## 6. Conclusion 

In this work, we present DyaDiT , a multi-modal dyadic gesture generation model designed to produce socially con-sistent and natural conversational behaviors between two speakers. By jointly conditioning on dyadic audio, so-cial attributes, and the partner’s motion, DyaDiT effec-tively captures interpersonal dynamics in dyadic conversa-tion. Our orthogonalization cross-attention (ORCA) mod-ule helps clarify the contribution of each speaker’s au-dio, and the motion dictionary enhances expressive rich-ness by providing style-aware motion priors. Both quan-titative and subjective evaluations demonstrate that DyaDiT achieves superior performance compared to existing meth-ods in terms of realism, diversity, and social coherence. We believe this work takes an important step toward socially fa-vorable synthetic agents and opens up future research direc-tions, such as socially aware dual-agent gesture generation. 87. Limitation & Future Work 

Currently, our model only generates upper-body gestures due to the limitations of the dataset. However, we believe that the proposed framework can be naturally extended to full-body gesture and facial expression generation. Further-more, although our model can generate socially favorable gestures according to the given relationship or personality conditioning, some personality cues may be unintentionally contained in the audio input, leading to conditioning con-flicts and reduced diversity in the generated motions. To further improve controllability and stabilize diversity, our future work will explore audio neutralization techniques to enable more diverse gesture generation. 

## References 

[1] Vasu Agrawal, Akinniyi Akinyemi, Kathryn Alvero, Morteza Behrooz, and et al. Seamless interaction: Dyadic audiovisual motion modeling and large-scale dataset. 2025. 1, 4, 6, 2 [2] Simon Alexanderson, Rajmund Nagy, Jonas Beskow, and Gustav Eje Henter. Listen, denoise, action! audio-driven mo-tion synthesis with diffusion models. ACM Trans. Graph. , 42 (4), 2023. 3, 6 [3] Tenglong Ao, Zeyi Zhang, and Libin Liu. Gesturediffu-clip: Gesture diffusion model with clip latents. ACM Trans. Graph. 3, 6, 7 [4] Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: a framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Asso-ciates Inc. 4, 1 [5] Bohong Chen, Yumeng Li, Youyi Zheng, Yao-Xiang Ding, and Kun Zhou. Motion-example-controlled co-speech ges-ture generation leveraging large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graph-ics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Pa-pers , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [6] Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, and Gang Yu. Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 18000–18010, 2023. 3 [7] Kiran Chhatre, Radek Danˇ eˇ cek, Nikos Athanasiou, Giorgio Becherini, Christopher Peters, Michael J. Black, and Timo Bolkart. AMUSE: Emotional speech-driven 3D body ani-mation via disentangled latent diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 1942–1953, 2024. 3 [8] Michael Dunne and Sik Hung Ng. Simultaneous speech in small group conversation: All-together-now and one-at-a-time? Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 13(1): 45–71, 1994. 2 [9] Filippo Favali, Viktor Schmuck, Valeria Villani, and Oya Ce-liktutan. Tag2g: A diffusion-based approach to interlocutor-aware co-speech gesture generation. Electronics , 13(17), 2024. 3 [10] Chencan Fu, Yabiao Wang, Jiangning Zhang, Zhengkai Jiang, Xiaofeng Mao, Jiafu Wu, Weijian Cao, Chengjie Wang, Yanhao Ge, and Yong Liu. Mambagesture: En-hancing co-speech gesture generation with mamba and dis-entangled multi-modality fusion. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , page 10794–10803, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [11] Shiry Ginosar, Amir Bar, Gefen Kohavi, Caroline Chan, An-drew Owens, and Jitendra Malik. Learning individual styles of conversational gesture. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 3492–3501, 2019. 2 [12] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, and Abhinav Jauhri et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. 2 [13] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications , 2021. 5 [14] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-sion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arxiv:2006.11239 ,2020. 4 [15] Cameron R. Jones and Benjamin K. Bergen. Large language models pass the turing test, 2025. 2 [16] Siyeol Jung and Taehwan Kim. Difflistener: Discrete dif-fusion model for listener generation. In ICASSP 2025 -2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5, 2025. 3 [17] Rawal Khirodkar, Jyun-Ting Song, Jinkun Cao, Zhengyi Luo, and Kris Kitani. Harmony4d: A video dataset for in-the-wild close human interactions. In Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , pages 107270–107285. Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2024. 2 [18] Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin Han. Autoregressive image generation using residual quantization, 2022. 5, 1 [19] Younglo Lee, Shukjae Choi, Byeong-Yeol Kim, Zhong-Qiu Wang, and Shinji Watanabe. Boosting unknown-number speaker separation with transformer decoder-based attrac-tor. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 446–450. IEEE, 2024. 2 [20] Jing Li, Di Kang, Wenjie Pei, Xuefei Zhe, Ying Zhang, Lin-chao Bao, and Zhenyu He. Audio2gestures: Generating di-verse gestures from audio. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-tion and Computer Graphics , 30(8):4752–4766, 2024. 6 [21] Haiyang Liu, Naoya Iwamoto, Zihao Zhu, Zhengqing Li, You Zhou, Elif Bozkurt, and Bo Zheng. Disco: Disentangled implicit content and rhythm learning for diverse co-speech gestures synthesis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia , page 3764–3773, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machin-ery. 2 [22] Haiyang Liu, Zihao Zhu, Naoya Iwamoto, Yichen Peng, Zhengqing Li, You Zhou, Elif Bozkurt, and Bo Zheng. Beat: 

9A large-scale semantic and emotional multi-modal dataset for conversational gestures synthesis. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part VII , page 612–630, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2022. Springer-Verlag. 2 [23] Haiyang Liu, Zihao Zhu, Giorgio Becherini, Yichen Peng, Mingyang Su, You Zhou, Xuefei Zhe, Naoya Iwamoto, Bo Zheng, and Michael J. Black. Emage: Towards unified holis-tic co-speech gesture generation via expressive masked audio gesture modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 1144–1154, 2024. 2 [24] Xian Liu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Yinghao Xu, Rui Qian, Xinyi Lin, Xiaowei Zhou, Wayne Wu, Bo Dai, and Bolei Zhou. Learning hierarchical cross-modal association for co-speech gesture generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 10462–10472, 2022. 2 [25] Cheng Luo, Siyang Song, Weicheng Xie, Micol Spitale, Zongyuan Ge, Linlin Shen, and Hatice Gunes. Reactface: Online multiple appropriate facial reaction generation in dyadic interactions. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 31(9):6190–6207, 2025. 3 [26] Cheng Luo, Siyang Song, Siyuan Yan, Zhen Yu, and Zongyuan Ge. Reactdiff: Fundamental multiple appropri-ate facial reaction diffusion model. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , page 5607–5616, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [27] Cheng Luo, Jianghui Wang, Bing Li, Siyang Song, and Bernard Ghanem. Omniresponse: Online multimodal con-versational response generation in dyadic interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21724 , 2025. 2, 3 [28] Antje S Meyer. Timing in conversation. Journal of Cogni-tion , 6(1):20, 2023. 2 [29] Muhammad Hamza Mughal, Rishabh Dabral, Ikhsanul Habibie, Lucia Donatelli, Marc Habermann, and Christian Theobalt. ConvoFusion: Multi-Modal Conversational Dif-fusion for Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis . In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 1388–1398, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2024. IEEE Computer Society. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8 [30] Julian Neri and Sebastian Braun. Towards real-time single-channel speech separation in noisy and reverberant environ-ments, 2023. 2 [31] Evonne Ng, Hanbyul Joo, Liwen Hu, Hao Li, Trevor Dar-rell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Shiry Ginosar. Learning to lis-ten: Modeling non-deterministic dyadic facial motion. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 20395–20405, 2022. 3 [32] Evonne Ng, Javier Romero, Timur Bagautdinov, Shaojie Bai, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Alexander Richard. From audio to photoreal embodiment: Synthesizing humans in conversations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 1001–1010, 2024. 2, 3, 6 [33] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, and Steven Adler et al. Gpt-4 techni-cal report, 2024. 2 [34] Kunkun Pang, Dafei Qin, Yingruo Fan, Julian Habekost, Takaaki Shiratori, Junichi Yamagishi, and Taku Komura. Bodyformer: Semantics-guided 3d body gesture synthesis with transformer. ACM Trans. Graph. , 42(4), 2023. 2 [35] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thir-tieth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Con-ference and Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Ad-vances in Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press, 2018. 5, 1 [36] Xingqun Qi, Chen Liu, Lincheng Li, Jie Hou, Haoran Xin, and Xin Yu. Emotiongesture: Audio-driven diverse emo-tional co-speech 3d gesture generation. Trans. Multi. , 26: 10420–10430, 2024. 2 [37] Yoni Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit Haim Bermano. Human motion diffusion as a generative prior. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2024. 3 [38] Siyang Song, Micol Spitale, Xiangyu Kong, Hengde Zhu, Cheng Luo, Cristina Palmero, German Barquero, Sergio Es-calera, Michel Valstar, Mohamed Daoudi, et al. React 2025: the third multiple appropriate facial reaction generation chal-lenge. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia , 2025. 3 [39] Hassan Taherian and DeLiang Wang. Multi-channel conversational speaker separation via neural diarization. 

IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32:2467–2476, 2024. 2 [40] Guy Tevet, Brian Gordon, Amir Hertz, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Motionclip: Exposing human mo-tion generation to clip space. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, Octo-ber 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXII , pages 358–374. Springer, 2022. 3 [41] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano. Human motion diffu-sion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 3 [42] Minh Tran, Di Chang, Maksim Siniukov, and Mohammad Soleymani. Dyadic interaction modeling for social behavior generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09069 , 2024. 2 [43] Yaohui Wang, Di Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza Dantcheva. Lia: Latent image animator. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , pages 1–16, 2024. 5 [44] Sicheng Yang, Zilin Wang, Zhiyong Wu, Minglei Li, Zhen-song Zhang, Qiaochu Huang, Lei Hao, Songcen Xu, Xiaofei Wu, Changpeng Yang, and Zonghong Dai. Unifiedgesture: A unified gesture synthesis model for multiple skeletons. In 

Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , page 1033–1044, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [45] Sicheng Yang, Haiwei Xue, Zhensong Zhang, Minglei Li, Zhiyong Wu, Xiaofei Wu, Songcen Xu, and Zonghong Dai. 

10 The diffusestylegesture+ entry to the genea challenge 2023. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Mul-timodal Interaction , page 779–785, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [46] Sicheng Yang, Zunnan Xu, Haiwei Xue, Yongkang Cheng, Shaoli Huang, Mingming Gong, and Zhiyong Wu. Freetalker: Controllable speech and text-driven gesture gen-eration based on diffusion models for enhanced speaker nat-uralness. In ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Confer-ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) ,2024. 2 [47] Hongwei Yi, Hualin Liang, Yifei Liu, Qiong Cao, Yandong Wen, Timo Bolkart, Dacheng Tao, and Michael J Black. Generating holistic 3d human motion from speech. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 469–480, 2023. 2 [48] Wanqi Yin, Zhongang Cai, Ruisi Wang, Ailing Zeng, Chen Wei, Qingping Sun, Haiyi Mei, Yanjun Wang, Hui En Pang, Mingyuan Zhang, Lei Zhang, Chen Change Loy, Atsushi Ya-mashita, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Smplest-x: Ultimate scal-ing for expressive human pose and shape estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09782 , 2025. 2 [49] Youngwoo Yoon, Bok Cha, Joo-Haeng Lee, Minsu Jang, Jaeyeon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Geehyuk Lee. Speech ges-ture generation from the trimodal context of text, audio, and speaker identity. ACM Trans. Graph. , 39(6), 2020. 2 [50] Jiangning Zhang, Liu Liang, Zhucun Xue, and Yong Liu. Apb2face: Audio-guided face reenactment with auxiliary pose and blink signals. pages 4402–4406, 2020. 3 [51] Mingyuan Zhang, Huirong Li, Zhongang Cai, Jiawei Ren, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Finemogen: Fine-grained spatio-temporal motion generation and editing. NeurIPS , 2023. 3 [52] Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Motion-diffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffu-sion model. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , 46(6): 4115–4128, 2024. 3 [53] Yihao Zhi, Xiaodong Cun, Xuelin Chen, Xi Shen, Wen Guo, Shaoli Huang, and Shenghua Gao. Livelyspeaker: Towards semantic-aware co-speech gesture generation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision (ICCV) , pages 20807–20817, 2023. 3 [54] Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation representations in neural networks. CoRR , abs/1812.07035, 2018. 4, 1 [55] Lingting Zhu, Xian Liu, Xuanyu Liu, Rui Qian, Ziwei Liu, and Lequan Yu. Taming diffusion models for audio-driven co-speech gesture generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10544–10553, 2023. 3 

11 DyaDiT: A Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer for Socially Favorable Dyadic Gesture Generation 

# Supplementary Material 

This supplementary material contains sections below: • 1. Relationships & Personality Clustering of Generated Results • 2. Implementation Details of DyaDiT • 3. Details of A/B Test Questionnaire In addition to this supplementary.pdf , we also in-clude a narration video.mp4 , which provides a brief overview of the paper along with several qualitative ges-ture generation examples. We further provide our imple-mentation in dyadit code.zip ; please refer to the in-cluded README.md for instructions on running the code. The trained models will be released upon acceptance. 

## 8. Clustering of Generated Gestures 

In the main paper, we conduct an A/B test to evaluate the re-lationship and personality consistency of the generated ges-tures. To further assess the controllability of the conditional inputs in DyaDiT, we perform a t-SNE clustering analysis on the generated motion embeddings. Figure 8 visualizes the t-SNE embeddings of the gener-ated gestures under different conditioning signals. On the left, we generate gestures using various relationship types while fixing the personality scores. On the right, we dis-cretize the continuous personality score features into five “one-hot” vectors and generate gestures for each vector to examine personality controllability. We observe that the personality clusters form clearly sep-arable groups, indicating that DyaDiT effectively captures the global behavioral tendencies associated with different personality traits. In contrast, the relationship clusters are less clearly separated. We consider this to be consistent with the nature of dyadic conversational gestures: the styles be-tween Friend , Family , and Dating share some overlap. As a result, the generated gestures also show a more continuous manifold across these categories rather than sharp cluster boundaries. 

## 9. Implementation Details 

Diffusion Transformer The input pose sequence is en-coded into a latent space aligned with the VQ-VAE repre-sentation, resulting in a latent embedding in R64 , instead of the original R43 ×6 6D rotation matrix [54] joint represen-tation. A linear layer projects the noisy latent input from 

R64 to a hidden space in R512 , followed by a symmetric projection back to R64 at the output. The model contains 4 Transformer blocks, each Friend  

> Stranger
> Family
> Dating
> Openness
> Agreeableness
> Conscientiousness
> Neuroticism
> Extraversion
> Relationship Personality Score

Figure 8. t-SNE clustering results of Relationships (left), Person-ality Scores (right). 

equipped with 4-head multi-head attention ( R128 ) and a 

R2048 feed-forward network. We employ a R512 sinusoidal time embedding, which is injected into each block through FiLM [35] modulation. Two independent Wav2Vec2 [4] processors extract high-level audio features from the conversational speech of both speakers. These yield feature sequences denoted as 

aself , a other ∈ RT ×768 , where T denotes the number of au-dio frames. Each of these is projected to RT ×512 via a linear transformation, followed by LayerNorm and a gated fusion mechanism to combine self and other speaker cues. A learnable motion bank contains 1000 prototype vec-tors in R512 , providing contextual priors via cross-attention. similar to the time embedding, relationship and personality embeddings are projected into R512 . These vectors are in-jected into the DiT blocks via FiLM-style adaptive scaling. All contextual cues are concatenated into a unified sequence in R512 and injected into each DiT block via cross-attention. 

Motion Tokenizer (VQ-VAE). We implement a temporal VQ-VAE [18] to discretize pose sequences before diffusion. Given an input sequence of joint features X ∈ RT ×6×43 ,the encoder is a 1D CNN consisting of three Conv1d lay-ers, with LeakyReLU applied after the first two layers, and an overall temporal downsampling factor of 4, producing a latent sequence in R(T / 4) ×64 . This continuous latent is quantized by a residual vector quantizer with depth 4, each equipped with a 512-entry codebook, which maps each time step to a stack of discrete code indices. The decoder is a 1D CNN consisting of an initial Conv1d-LeakyReLU layer, two upsampling blocks (linear interpolation followed by Conv1d and LeakyReLU) interleaved with additional 1Conv1d-LeakyReLU refinement layers, and a final Conv1d projection, achieving an overall temporal upsampling factor of 4 and recovering the original temporal resolution to re-construct poses in RT ×6×43 . The final latent representation used by the DiT denoiser is obtained from the quantized codes as a compact 64-dimensional embedding per 4 × T

frames in R64 .

Seamless Interactive Dataset. We conduct our experi-ments on a part of the Seamless Interaction dataset [1]. In particular, we adopt the naturalistic split of the dataset. For training, we utilize the first 10 official training archives (provided as zip files), which contain approximately 182 hours of naturalistic interactions and 3000 paired motion-audio samples. For testing, we select the first archive from the official test split to ensure a consistent evaluation set-ting. We observe that the SMPL-H parameters provided in the dataset exhibit noticeable inaccuracies in lower body esti-mation, likely due to limited camera views and body oc-clusions during data capture. To avoid introducing artifacts into our motion modeling, we discard lower-body joints and only retain the upper body comprising 43 joints, includ-ing fingers. For visualization, all unused joints, along with global orientation and root translation, are set to zero. In addition to pose data, the dataset includes high level annotations such as relationship and personality scores .While the dataset provides Interpersonal Communicative Dynamic (IPC) tags for social dynamics, we found the an-notations to be too noisy and ambiguous where it is un-clear which speaker they apply to. Consequently, we do not employ IPC tag supervision in our current study and in-stead focus on the cleaner relationship and personality cues. We note that once the IPC annotations are refined in fu-ture dataset releases, we plan to extend our framework with an IPC-awared conditioning module to further capture com-municative intent in dyadic gestures. In the future, we plan to re-annotate the video data using advanced human pose estimation tools such as SMPLest-x [48], Harmony4D [17] or recent state-of-the-art models, with the aim of obtaining more reliable full body motion supervision. 

## 10. Questionnaire 

We provide a reconstructed version of the A/B test ques-tionnaire used in our user study. To view the questionnaire, please first extract the questionnaire video.zip 

file inside the questionnaire folder. After extrac-tion, open questionnaire.html in any modern web browser. The original questionnaire was conducted through Google Forms (see Figure 9). It consists of 28 × 2 questions in total, including 10 questions on overall gesture quality, 8 questions on relationship consistency, and 10 questions on personality consistency. Each question presents paired ges-ture videos for comparison under two settings: DyaDiT vs. ConvoFusion and DyaDiT vs. Ground Truth .For an accurate viewing experience, please wear head-phones. The left audio channel corresponds to the partner’s speech, while the right audio channel corresponds to the tar-get speaker’s speech. The reconstructed interface allows reviewers to browse all questions and play the corresponding videos to experi-ence the same evaluation procedure as our participants. 

> Figure 9. Example of Questionnaires in GoogleForm

2